---
title: "HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE THIRD CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE UNITED NATIONS FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE, 3 DECEMBER 1997"
id: enb1270e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1270e
date: 1997-12-03
abstract: "Delegates to the Third Conference of the Parties (COP-3) to  the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC) met in  morning and afternoon Plenary sessions to consider the  report of the Global Environment Facility (GEF), technology  transfer, review of the implementation of the Convention,  and amendments to the Convention. Negotiating groups on  quantified emission limitation and reduction objectives  (QELROs) and FCCC Article 4.1 (commitments) continued their  discussions."
---

# PLENARY

GEF Chair Mohamed El-Ashry introduced the GEF report, which  updates previous information on efforts to implement the  guidance provided by previous COP meetings and includes a  complete listing of GEF-financed climate change projects.  He recalled that some Parties had said the GEF procedures  were not 'user friendly,' and noted the adoption of further  streamlined procedures for the preparation of projects for  enabling activities. GEF has provided support to 85 climate  change projects addressing the needs of 114 countries at a  cost of US$63 million. He highlighted Annex A of the  report, which describes problems encountered in applying  the concept of agreed full incremental costs. He also noted  consensus among donors on a replenishment target of US$2.75  billion.

The EU expressed disappointment that delegates had not  agreed to establish GEF as the permanent financial  mechanism this year. He commended the agreed level of  financial support for climate change activities. CHINA  noted that efforts to advance existing commitments are  handicapped by a lack of resources and called for a  substantial increase in the GEF replenishment. He called  for an expeditious approval process for funding and noted  that developing countries face enormous difficulties in  undertaking GHG inventories.

URUGUAY indicated that it had been able to submit its first  national communication on GHG sources and sinks because of  GEF financing. The CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC said that the  report should be more detailed and include difficulties  encountered by Parties in obtaining GEF resources to  prepare national communications. SWITZERLAND, supported by  the US, said that GEF should be established as the  permanent FCCC financial mechanism. The G-77/CHINA referred  to the provision of financial resources and the transfer of  technology as fundamental to implementation of the  Convention by non-Annex I Parties. He pointed out that both  were developed countries' obligations under the Convention  and should not be used to push developing countries to  accept new commitments or to accept a market-based approach  under the protocol. The PHILIPPINES mentioned experiencing  problems with implementing agencies and said that they  should be more aware of decisions taken by the GEF Council.  INDIA, BHUTAN, BANGLADESH and KIRIBATI highlighted the  importance of obtaining GEF financing for national  communications. The US said GEF had made an effort to meet  the needs of FCCC Parties and expressed disappointment at  the fact that the review of the financial mechanism had not  concluded. He also pointed to the need for finding  innovative sources of financing involving the private  sector.

The COP President introduced a discussion on the  development and transfer of technologies. CHINA, supported  by INDIA and IRAN, observed two tendencies: developed  countries are only interested in transfer of technical  information, while developing countries deem technology  transfer on non-commercial and preferential terms most  important; and some countries emphasize market mechanisms.  She called for action from developed countries consistent  with Agenda 21, the FCCC and previous COP resolutions, and  recommended that that the issue be taken up as a separate  item at COP-4. SOUTH AFRICA said access to technology and  transfer of technical know-how would play a crucial role in  meeting the energy implications of moving towards  sustainable development. JAPAN outlined the Kyoto  Initiative to strengthen assistance for developing  countries in their efforts to combat global warming, to be  operated through the national Official Development  Assistance program.  The program will offer concessional  loans to promote training, cooperation on energy-saving  technology, new and renewable energy sources, forest  conservation and aforestation, and will establish  information networks and workshops. INDIA, supported by  IRAN, called for the operationalization of the FCCC  provisions relating to state-of-the-art environmentally  sound technologies (EST), with supporting provisions in the  new legal instrument. He also called for a streamlining of  the activities of the SBI and SBSTA.

AUSTRALIA said the bulk of ESTs are privately developed and  owned. Governments can create enabling conditions for  technology development and recipient countries must have  appropriate policies for successful transfers. The REPUBLIC  OF KOREA said his country was in consultation with the  UNEP, UNDP and the Commission on Sustainable Development  with a view to scheduling an expert group meeting on  technology transfer in Seoul in February 1998. The outcome  will be reported to the 1998 session of the CSD. ZIMBABWE  outlined her country's difficulties with basic economic  development and the financial impact of El Niño. She said  technology transfer had become a critical issue. IRAN  identified obstacles facing developing countries seeking  transfers of technology at their own expense due to  restrictions imposed by developed countries. He said  developed country governments who shift responsibilities  for transfers to the private sector are contradicting the  spirit of Agenda 21.

The Chair introduced discussion of Agenda Sub-Item 3(d),  Second review of the adequacy of Article 4.2(a) and (b).   The first review was undertaken at COP-1. After judging  these commitments inadequate COP-1 undertook the Berlin  Mandate process.  Article 4.2(d) calls for a second review  before 1999. SBI-6 requested the Secretariat to make  preparations for COP-3 to include the review in the agenda  for COP-4. AOSIS, with CHINA and ZIMBABWE, stated that  deliberation of this item is premature given that it is  unclear what the actions taken under the Berlin Mandate  process will accomplish. He predicted that the visible  effects of climate change will have to become devastating  before the Annex I countries pushing mediocre proposals  take real action.

CHINA said the lack of national communications also makes  it premature to review adequacy of commitments. The US  pointed out that the review must take account of the Kyoto  outcome, and asked that the nature of the review be  clarified. He objected to a de novo review process if the  outcome of Kyoto is successful. CHINA disagreed, saying  that the review is independent of the outcome in Kyoto and  noting the Article 4.2(d) deadline of December 1998. CANADA  expressed uncertainty as to what the review would  accomplish. Delegates decided that necessary preparations  should be made to place the review of Articles 4.2(a) and  (b) on the Agenda of COP-4.

On Item 3(e), Review of information and possible decisions  under Article 4.2(f), delegates agreed on the proposal that  Croatia, the Czech Republic and Slovakia replace  Czechoslovakia in Annex I. Delegates debated at length a  proposal by Azerbaijan and Pakistan to delete Turkey from  Annex I and Annex II. IRAN, TURKEY and KUWAIT supported the  proposal. The EU and AUSTRALIA maintained that Turkey  should indicate willingness to undertake Protocol  obligations under Article 10 before its deletion from the  Annexes. The US suggested continuing consideration of this  proposal and other OECD members' relationship to Annex I at  COP-4. TURKEY noted that questions remain unanswered on the  Protocol's proposed Article 10 and requested that ministers  discuss the matter on 10 December. The Chair proposed that  Luis Herrera (Venezuela) undertake consultations on these  amendments.

Delegates considered proposed amendments to the Convention  and its Annexes (FCCC/SBI/1997/15). The EU presented a  proposal to amend Article 17 to state that Parties shall  make every effort to agree on any proposed protocol by  consensus and if no agreement is reached, the protocol  shall be adopted by a 3/4 majority. This amendment would be  applied provisionally, pending its entry into force in  accordance with Article 15.

The EU said objections to the protocol may remain at the  end of COP-3 and a decision-making procedure would be  needed. The RUSSIAN FEDERATION emphasized that voting is  not the way to adopt an important international instrument.  VENEZUELA said the amendment and its provisional  application must be considered separately. Sergio Alejandro  Zelaya Bonilla (Honduras) will conduct informal  consultations.

Under Kuwait's proposed amendment, Parties shall provide  financial resources, including the transfer of technology,  as the COP may decide they are needed by the developing  country Parties. Kuwait said the developing countries can  only lower emissions through technology, but resources made  available to date have been inadequate. The EU, supported  by the US and JAPAN, said donors should not place their  resources in the hands of the COP. SAUDI ARABIA said the  amendment came in reaction to the EU proposal, which upsets  the Convention's 'delicate balance.' NIGERIA said linkages  between the two proposals must be considered. Bakary Kante  (Senegal) will conduct informal consultations.

Following a proposal by CROATIA, delegates discussed the  status of Yugoslavia in relation to the Convention.

# COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE

### QELROs

The negotiating group on QELROs met in the morning  and briefly discussed articles on economies in transition,  joint implementation and emissions trading.  The debate  focused on voluntary commitments for non-Annex I Parties,  where a divergence of views persisted. The Chair alluded to  the fact that the text of the Article on voluntary  commitments had originally been submitted by AOSIS  countries, and therefore, by members of the G-77/China. A  representative of AOSIS clarified that the proposal had  been made at an early stage of negotiations when the  scenario was different, and stated its support for the G-77/China position. The developing countries reiterated  their opposition to new commitments for non-Annex I  Parties. The informal group on sinks continued its  consultations on the Chair's draft text and was to report  to the QELROs group in the evening. A Japanese proposal  establishing three different categories of Annex I  countries was considered in informal consultations on  differentiation. There were also informal discussions on a  'three-plus-three' gas coverage proposal, which would  divide six gases into two baskets. The first basket (CO2,  CH4 and N2O) would be subject to QELROs immediately, while  proposals for formulating QELROs for the second basket  (HFCs, PFCs and SF6) would be debated at COP-4.

### ARTICLE 4.1

The negotiating group on commitments under  Article 4.1 met in the afternoon to discuss a Chair's draft  text. Delegates agreed not to discuss three reformulated  paragraphs in the draft, covering national and regional  programmes for GHG inventories and mitigation and  adaptation measures, actions to address climate change, and  reporting, after a group of countries said it preferred to  base discussions on the prior version of those paragraphs.

A developed country called for deletion of bracketed text  on [financial and fiscal] incentives for technology  transfer. A regional group suggested combining the first  two sentences of separate options on technology transfer  and deleting the remaining text of both. Some Parties  expressed concern over text on removing barriers to  investment in technology transfer. A group of countries  suggested adding the phrase 'developed country Parties  shall' to paragraphs regarding technology transfer, but  some developed countries objected.

In a paragraph on procedures through which governments  could take climate change considerations into account in  relevant decisions, a group of countries objected to a  phrase extending the recommendation to multilateral  development banks. A group of countries suggested deleting  a paragraph on indicators for assessment of climate change  impacts and responses, but a developed country wanted to  retain the paragraph.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

Formulae for differentiation have begun to proliferate,  with at least two suggestions that would form a number of  groups or categories  among Annex I parties. A Japanese  delegate said Japan's proposal for three categories is  under active consideration. The proposers have, however,  distanced themselves from suggestions that their proposal  would set a reduction target for the US at 3.5 % and for  the EU at 7.5 %. The EU has indicated that it will not  settle for a higher target than the US. The EU's position  on differentiation is that Parties should follow the EU  'bubble' example and form burden sharing groups. For  example, a number of EU spokespersons have suggested that  the US could join its NAFTA partners. The US has not yet  detailed its preferred approach to differentiation.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### COW

Delegates will meet in negotiating groups. Consult the  journal for rooms and times.