---
title: "MEETINGS OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES TO THE FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE 20 - 30 OCTOBER 1997"
id: enb1256e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1256e
date: 1997-10-30
abstract: "The seventh sessions of the Subsidiary Body for  Implementation (SBI-7) and the Subsidiary Body for  Scientific and Technical Advice (SBSTA-7) will open on  Monday, 20 October 1997 at the Beethovenhalle in Bonn,  Germany. The eighth session of the Ad Hoc Group on the  Berlin Mandate (AGBM-8) will open on Wednesday, 22 October."
---

# MEETINGS SINCE AGBM-7

### WHITE HOUSE CONFERENCE ON CLIMATE CHANGE

US President Bill  Clinton convened a White House Conference on Climate Change  on 6 October 1997 at Georgetown University in Washington,  DC. The conference, which was simulcast to universities and  colleges across the country, consisted of opening speeches,  panel discussions on the science of global warming and  climate change, the role of technology and economic  impacts. Local panel discussions were held at each  participating university. The conference was part of a  White House effort to build domestic support for a treaty  to set legally binding limits on greenhouse gas emissions.  Clinton said the US will ask for ‘‘meaningful but equitable  commitments'' from all nations, but did not spell out in  detail what the US position would be in Kyoto. He said his  administration was divided. Some economic advisers doubted  new technologies could adequately soften the economic blow  of strict reductions of pollution. Clinton also said he was  convinced that the science of climate change is real, as  scientists at the conference said broad patterns of high  temperatures over the last several years were consistent  with computer predictions of global warming.

Many speakers supported the idea that the US and other  countries must fight global warming, but economists  differed on how swift and drastic action should be. The  panel of economists offered widely differing views on how  best to fight global warming. One recommended a carbon tax  to cut emissions, as long as it came with offsetting tax  cuts and market incentives such as emissions trading  credits and credits for energy-saving projects in  developing countries, while another said boosting energy  prices could produce a recession like that in the oil- shocked 1970s. Another said Clinton's decision should be  based on taking enough time for an 'economic transition''  that helps workers through changes. For more information  contact: the White House Office of Science and Technology  Policy; tel: +1 (202) 395-7347.

### UNION OF CONCERNED SCIENTISTS

The Union of Concerned  Scientists met on 30 September 1997 in Washington, DC.  Nearly 1,500 scientists from 60 countries urged immediate  action to curb man-made climate changes. The scientists,  including 98 Nobel laureates, urged world leaders to adopt  a strong treaty to fight emissions of carbon from burning  fossil fuels that are changing the climate. Without swift  action, they said the world faces a future of rising sea  levels, more intense storms and droughts, food shortages,  spreading diseases and vanishing wildlife. The Declaration  issued by the scientists states that the world's political  leaders can demonstrate a new commitment to the protection  of the environment, and they should augment the  Convention's voluntary measures with legally binding  commitments to reduce industrial nations' emissions of  heat-trapping gases significantly below 1990 levels in  accordance with a near-term timetable. The Declaration also  specifies that over time, developing nations must also be  engaged in limiting their emissions. Developed and  developing nations must cooperate to mitigate climatic  disruption. The scientists encouraged other scientists and  citizens around the world to hold their leaders accountable  for addressing the global warming threat.

The Declaration also outlines linkages and further damage.  It notes, inter alia, that destructive logging and  deforestation for agriculture continue to wreak havoc on  the world's remaining tropical forests. Fossil-fueled  energy use is climbing, both in industrial nations and in  the developing world, adding to atmospheric carbon. Efforts  to enhance energy conservation and improve efficiency are  much hindered by low energy costs and by perverse  incentives that encourage waste. The Declaration also notes  that the insurance industry has recognized the risks posed  by climate change. The Declaration discusses water scarcity  and food security, noting that humanity now uses over one- half of the total accessible freshwater runoff. Freshwater  is the scarcest resource in the Middle East and in North  Africa. Efforts to husband freshwater are not succeeding  there, in East Asia, or in the Pacific.

Global food production now appears to be outpaced by growth  in consumption and population. There is broad agreement  that food demand will double by 2030. Climate change is  likely to exacerbate these food problems by adversely  affecting water supplies, soil conditions, temperature  tolerances, and growing seasons. According to the  Declaration, climate change will accelerate the appalling  pace at which species are now being liquidated, especially  in vulnerable ecosystems. For more information contact the  Union of Concerned Scientists; e-mail: ucs@ucsdusa.org.

### CLEAN ENERGY SYMPOSIUM FOR ECONOMIES IN TRANSITION

This  symposium, held from 22 - 26 September in Szentendre,  Hungary and organized by the Renewable Energy and  Efficiency Training Institute (REETI), brought together  over 125 corporate, financial, governmental and non- governmental officials to discuss energy efficiency and  renewable energy project development opportunities for the  Central and Southeast European countries currently  undergoing economic transformation. The programme was  developed in collaboration with the US Country Studies  Program (CSP) and the Regional Southeast European  Cooperation Initiative (SECI) to support their clean energy  programs. Participants noted that the meeting assisted  these countries in transforming their policy initiatives  into market realities by supporting the development of  investments in emerging clean energy market segments and  facilitating several projects. The Symposium was sponsored  by, inter alia, the Hungarian Ministry of Industry and  Trade, the CSP, the World Bank Group and the Government of  the Netherlands. For more information contact the REETI;  tel: +1 (202) 496-1417; +1 (202) 496-1494; e-mail;  rhsellers@aol.com.

### FIFTH INTERNATIONAL CARBON DIOXIDE CONFERENCE

This  conference was held in Cairns, Australia from 8 - 12  September 1997. Over 200 delegates from 25 countries  discussed the latest in research on the global carbon  cycle. The program was organized around half-hour  presentations of the most topical results with other papers  presented in a series of poster sessions both during the  day and into the evenings. The conference was organized  into sessions that covered papers under the general topics  of oceans, atmosphere and the terrestrial biosphere. The  oceans sessions covered topics as diverse as iron  fertilization experiments, the rate of CO2 uptake by the  oceans, and modeling the oceanic carbon cycle. The  atmosphere sessions covered a range of attempts to model  atmospheric CO2 variations on a variety of temporal scales  and topics such as the oxygen content of the atmosphere and  the isotopic composition of atmospheric CO2. Papers on the  terrestrial biosphere also focused heavily on attempts to  model the terrestrial carbon cycle, and presented the  latest results on the likelihood of a CO2 fertilization  effect, and on the magnitude of current land-use changes.

Much discussion in many sessions focused on the 'missing  CO2 sink', and while there appears to be general agreement  that the sink lies in the terrestrial biosphere, it became  apparent that there is a long way to go before there is  agreement on exactly where the sink is located. One camp  still favors the high latitude forests as the sink, based  on inverse modeling of the global distribution of isotopic  anomalies in the atmospheric CO2. An emerging alternative  is that the sink is actually located in the tropical  forests, with evidence in support of this hypothesis coming  from eddy covariance experiments in the Amazon Basin, and  global physiological models of carbon uptake by the  terrestrial biota. Further background to the meeting and  its organization can be found in summary form at  http://www.dar.csiro.au/pub/events/co2_conf/index.html

### FOURTH INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CARBON DIOXIDE  UTILIZATION (ICCDU-IV)

This conference was held from 7 -  11 September in Kyoto, Japan and was attended by 280  participants from 21 countries. Participants heard lectures  from 13 invited speakers and 123 general papers were  presented. The catalytic conversion of CO2 in flue gases  and biochemical conversion of CO2 in the atmosphere were  two major topics, comprising nearly 70% of all  presentations. Other topics included photochemical,  electrochemical, and organometallic fixation of CO2.  Participants also heard presentations concerning general  subjects on CO2 utilization, such as Japan's basic strategy  concerning counter-measures to mitigate climate change and  the International Energy Agency's actions on climate  change. The proceedings will be published from Elsevier  Science Publishers in February 1998. For more information  contact Professor Tomoyuki Inui, Kyoto University; tel: +81  75 753 5682; fax; +81 75 771 7285; e-mail: inui@scl.kyo-to- u.ac.jp.

### SPREP MEETING ON CLIMATE CHANGE AND SEA LEVEL RISE

The  Third South Pacific Regional Environment Programme (SPREP)  Meeting on Climate Change and Sea Level Rise was held in  Noumea, New Caledonia from 18-22 August 1997. The Chairs  for the meeting were the Government Representatives and  Administrators of American Samoa, Cook Islands, Kiribati,  Samoa and Vanuatu. The Chair's 'Summary of Findings and  Future Needs' states, inter alia, that a review of  scientific information and understanding in the Pacific  regarding climate change and sea level rise draws on  information from a range of sources. They show that  temperatures have been increasing by 0.10C per decade in  the region and sea levels by 2mm/yr. There is also evidence  that climate phenomena such has El Niño and Southern  Oscillation (ENSO) will have major influences in the impact  of CC&SLR. It is also recognized that the Pacific region  plays an important role in understanding global climate  change.

Vulnerability assessments have shown Pacific Island  countries to be highly vulnerable to CC&SLR with a low  capacity to respond. This response capability needs to be  strengthened through regional and international cooperation  and education, training and awareness raising. The Summary  also discussed the impact on human health and states that  regional, national and international communities should  focus on adapting to present natural variability and  prepare for extreme events. Participants also noted that  the IPCC assessment of the social and economic dimensions  of climate change has little reference to Pacific Island  countries. They noted that the IPCC report uses models that  are mainly for developed economies and that all islands are  treated as if they are the same. Most Pacific Island  governments are aware of climate change, but they wish to  know what they have to do to address the problem. The  cultural dimension involves the environmental influence on  both people and culture. The response options for the  region  include migration, resettlement and  decentralisation. All these need planning as they have  policy implications. Thus, the future direction will have  to be researched so that some response strategies will be  planned and recommended for the future adaptations. For  more information contact: South Pacific Regional  Environment Programme (SPREP), P.O. Box 240, APIA, Western  Samoa; tel: (685) 21 929; fax: (685) 20 231, e-mail:  sprep@pactok.peg.apc.org.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### SBI

SBI will meet at 10:00 am and consider national  communications

### SBSTA

SBSTA will meet at 3:00 pm and consider non-Annex I  communications, activities implemented jointly and  technology transfer.