---
title: "HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE FCCC FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE, 9 NOVEMBER 1998"
id: enb1293e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1293e
date: 1998-11-09
abstract: "The Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice  (SBSTA) considered draft decisions for adoption by the COP.  Contact groups continued their deliberations on: non-Annex I  communications; technology transfer; the financial mechanism;  FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9; and the flexibility mechanisms."
---

# SBSTA

SBSTA met to consider the reports, draft conclusions and  decisions of the informal consultations and contact groups on:  research and systematic observation (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.6);  scientific and methodological aspects of the proposal by Brazil  (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/L.7); land use change and forestry  (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.7); and the relationship between efforts to  protect the stratospheric ozone layer and efforts to safeguard  the global climate system (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.8).

Co-Chair Sue Barrell (Australia) presented the draft conclusions  and decisions of the informal consultations on research and  systematic observation (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.6). She said there  was consensus on the urgent need to improve the quality,  coverage and management of the reporting systems. The draft  conclusions outlined decisions to develop an action plan to  consider options for implementation, and requested the  Secretariat to compile a report on priorities for action to  improve global observing systems in relation to the needs of the  Convention. The RUSSIAN FEDERATION noted the need to support  national meteorological systems. He proposed inclusion of  systems for the measurement of greenhouse gases and other  atmospheric components, reference to satellite systems for data  collection and distinction between anthropogenic and natural  climate change variations. He suggested that the draft be  amended to indicate that national meteorological systems also  measure greenhouse gas emissions. The Chair noted that the  Global Atmosphere Watch covered the observation of greenhouse  gases.

AOSIS, supported by MAURITIUS, noted the lack of current  observation networks in developing countries and stressed the  need to strengthen indigenous capacity to ensure network  sustainability. The US supported the text, but suggested the  draft indicate that the session was focused primarily on  observation systems, so as not to prejudice the research  component.

Delegates debated references to atmospheric observing systems  and measurement of greenhouse gas concentrations and agreed to  text that 'urges Parties to actively support national  meteorological and atmospheric observing systems, including  measurement of greenhouse gases.' Delegates also debated  language requesting Parties to submit information on their  participation in global climate observing systems and requesting  SBSTA to report to COP-5 on developments regarding observational  networks. CHINA said guidelines on initial national  communications from non-Annex I countries did not include  reference to this information and submitting it was voluntary.  MALAWI highlighted the need for financial support. The UK  suggested the 'climate agenda' draw on, inter alia, the  information provided in the second national communication of  Annex I Parties and the initial national communication of non- Annex I Parties as appropriate. The decision was adopted as  amended.

In the draft conclusions on the scientific and methodological  aspects of the proposal by Brazil, SBSTA decided to consider the  issue further. It called on Brazil to report at SBSTA's next  session. The conclusions were adopted.

On land use change and forestry (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.7), the  draft conclusions called for the organization of a second SBSTA  workshop prior to the tenth session to focus on issues related  to Article 3.4 of the Kyoto Protocol (such as methodologies,  uncertainties, and research and data needs) and welcomed the  offer of the US to provide a venue. SBSTA invited Parties to  provide submissions on issues to be considered at the workshop.  AOSIS stressed that IPCC should be allowed to work  independently. He called upon the Secretariat to support the  participation of delegates from the most vulnerable group of  countries in the second workshop. At the request of the RUSSIAN  FEDERATION and other Parties, the title of the draft conclusion  was amended to read 'land use, land-use change and forestry.'  The draft conclusions were adopted as amended.

SBSTA considered a recommendation on the relationship between  efforts to protect the stratospheric ozone layer and efforts to  safeguard the global climate system (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.8). The  RUSSIAN FEDERATION said the process was moving ahead too quickly  and there was no need to prepare a document to be considered at  the next COP. The Chair explained that a 'step by step approach'  was embodied in the document, from the invitation to various  bodies to provide information to the report by the SBSTA to the  next COP. Chair Chow clarified that the decision on the matter  would be taken at SBSTA-11, which would give the Secretariat  ample time. ICELAND suggested the information compiled by the  Secretariat based on the submissions made by various bodies,  including NGO's, be forwarded to the joint-workshop of the IPCC  and the Technology and Economic Assessment Panel of the Montreal  Protocol in 1999. The Chair said it would be impractical to  expect the Secretariat to produce the compilation in time for  the workshop.

The RUSSIAN FEDERATION suggested deleting the requirement of a  Report from the Secretariat, as the IPCC Report could provide  the required information. The Chair clarified there would be two  separate reports and was confident Parties would be able to  reach credible conclusions. The CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC  proposed deleting the requirement for the Secretariat to compile  the conclusions of the joint workshop. The EU and CHINA opposed  the suggestion as it would mean additional work for the IPCC.  The Chair clarified that the Secretariat was only to compile the  information provided and not rewrite the IPCC document. The  RUSSIAN FEDERATION suggested requesting the Secretariat to  compile only a three-page report. The draft decision was  adopted, despite the objection of the Russian Federation.

Supported by the EU, SAMOA expressed concern over the absence of  compliance in the COP agenda. He proposed the establishment of  an ad hoc and open-ended group to consider the issues and report  to the next COP. He said an effective and equitable compliance  regime should ensure consistency in its application to all the  obligations under the Protocol. It should: provide compliance  responses that reflect the common but differentiated  responsibilities of Parties; respect the capabilities of  Parties; reflect the institutions and procedures that embody the  principles of due process and geographical balance of interests;  and operate in a timely manner. The Chair said that the issue is  being addressed in the consultations on the preparation for  COP/MOP-1.

# CONTACT GROUPS

The contact group on the financial mechanism, chaired by John  Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda) and Dan Reifsnyder (USA) met in a  closed session and discussed a text proposed by the Co-Chairs.  No decisions were taken. Delegates indicated that they wanted  feedback from other contact groups, such as those on technology  transfer and FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9. Delegates linked the  decision on the status of the GEF with the discussion on  guidance to the GEF. Consultations will continue.

The contact group on technology met to continue discussions on  the proposed draft decision. In presenting the modifications to  the document, the Co-Chair drew attention to the deadline for  the preparation of a miscellaneous document, compiling  information on projects and programmes on cooperative approaches  to technology transfer. CHINA said a technology transfer  mechanism would facilitate progress and assist all Parties in  fulfilling the Convention objectives. The draft decision  included an annex with a list of functions for a possible  process defined by the G-77/China and a preliminary list of  issues and questions. The US proposed the inclusion of questions  relating to the role of the private sector as well as on  measures that can create an appropriate enabling environment for  their involvement. The delegates discussed the modifications on  the text. As of 6 p.m., delegates were debating what the outcome  of the consultative process would be called.

The contact group on non-Annex I national communications,  chaired by Paul Malcons (South Africa) and Dan Reifsnyder (US),  met on Monday evening. Delegates considered a draft text,  although much of it remains in brackets. Discussion centered  around a number of issues including: whether national  communications will be evaluated and if there will be a process  of ongoing evaluation; whether a compilation and synthesis of  non-Annex I national communications will be completed, and if so  when; whether there will be in-country reviews; and whether  workshops will help the consideration and/or preparation of  national communications. The group will reconvene Tuesday  morning.

The contact group on the implementation of FCCC Article 4.8 and  4.9 (decision 3/CP.3 and Protocol Articles 2.3 and 3.14)  (adverse effects) met in a closed session under the chairmanship  of Bo Kjellen (Sweden) and Mohammad Salamat (Iran). Prior to the  meeting, the chairs circulated a draft decision, which decided  that the basic elements for further analysis should include: the  identification of adverse effects; determination of the impacts  of implementation measures in developing countries; the  identification of the specific needs and concerns of developing  country Parties arising from such adverse effects and impacts;  and identifying further necessary actions related to funding,  insurance and the transfer of technology in order to meet the  needs of developing countries. A programme of work was proposed  that included: an expert workshop (April, 1999); further  discussion in subsidiary bodies (SBSTA and SBI 10, June 1999);  identification of needs for further information needed (COP-5,  October 1999); and decisions made (COP-6, October 2000). As of  10:30 pm, delegates were unable to reach agreement and will  continue discussion.

The contact group on mechanisms met to debate a draft work  programme on mechanisms. The G-77/CHINA submitted a proposed  work programme containing an extensive list of issues, embodying  a 'step-by-step' approach and prioritizing the CDM. In response,  the US, supported by CANADA and AUSTRALIA, suggested the contact  group address four questions: what type of decision should be  made, when, by whom, and how it should move forward. He added  that there were two options, negotiate the items or keep the  list of items open. The EU said the G-77/China draft programme  lacked inter alia, a clear timeline, deadlines and allocation of  work to different bodies. They rejected the prioritization of  work, calling for parallel development of all three mechanisms.  The Co-Chairs introduced a draft decision on mechanisms, taking  into consideration the views expressed at the Group, admitting  that it was outside their mandate. Australia said the issues  settled at Kyoto should not be re-opened. As of 10:30 p.m. the  delegates were unable to reach agreement and were continuing  deliberations. They will meet from 11:00am-2:00pm on Tuesday.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

Some participants reported that the US and the EU held high  level negotiations on Saturday concerning the development of  compliance mechanism(s). The EU reportedly supports a  comprehensive regime and a work plan to establish it, but  expressed concern that the US policy is unclear. No agreement  was reached and some have reported that meaningful progress  seems unlikely. Some G-77/CHINA delegates expressed increasing  discomfort with the continuing focus on voluntary commitments  presented in the BuenosAyres newspaper. Sentiment peaked when  the paper published a survey suggesting that 66 countries of 130  surveyed desired debate on this topic.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR

### CONTACT GROUPS

Contact groups will begin meeting at 8:00 am.

### SBI

SBI will meet from 7:00 pm to midnight in Plenary II.