---
title: "IPCC-24 HIGHLIGHTS"
id: enb12273e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12273e
date: 
abstract: "The eighth session of Working Group III (WGIII-8) of the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) began on  Thursday, 22 September, in Montreal, Canada, with delegates  considering the Special Report on Carbon Dioxide Capture and  Storage (Special Report). In the morning, delegates heard opening  addresses, listened to a presentation on the draft Summary for  Policymakers (SPM) and began deliberations on the text of the  draft SPM. In the afternoon, delegates continued line-by-line  deliberations on the text. Delegates also met in a contact group  to consider the first two paragraphs of the SPM, which define  carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS) and discuss how it could  contribute to mitigating climate change."
---

# OPENING OF THE SESSION

IPCC Chairman Rajendra Pachauri (India) welcomed delegates and  noted the high expectations surrounding the Special Report because  this is the first time that a comprehensive assessment of CCS has  been carried out. He highlighted that the drafting process  included the participation of industry and civil society, and  emphasized the need to ensure outreach efforts in light of  existing information and knowledge gaps on CCS.

# PRESENTATION ON THE DRAFT SUMMARY FOR POLICY MAKERS

WGIII Co-Chair Bert Metz (The Netherlands) introduced the draft  SPM. He explained that highlights from the SPM would be presented  as it would not be practical to introduce every chapter of the  Special Report as originally envisaged in the agenda. WGIII  Co-Chair Ogunlade Davidson (Sierra Leone) explained that the SPM  is organized on the basis of several key questions about CCS. He  noted that reference to technology diffusion and transfer was not  included in the SPM because of a lack of literature, and that  information on gaps in CCS knowledge was not included due to space  limitations. He reminded delegates that the SPM aims to cover key  issues relevant to decision makers but that it does not include  policy recommendations.

Noting the difficulty in categorizing the current maturity of  different CCS system components, Co-Chair Davidson said that CCS  technologies had been grouped as being at one of four 'phases' of  maturity: those in the research phase; those in the demonstration  phase; those that are economically feasible under certain  conditions; and those that have a mature market.

Continuing the presentation, Co-Chair Metz noted that, on  electricity costs, assumptions of oil prices at US$15 - 20 per  barrel could not be changed given a lack of literature. On storage  potential, he noted that: an expert judgment was made to derive  the figure of 2000Gt of carbon dioxide for geological storage;  industrial uses of carbon dioxide are technically possible but  that their potential is relatively small; and technical estimates  for oceans and mineral carbonation cannot yet be made. Regarding  the economic potential of CCS, he stated that since experience  with CCS is limited, scenario studies are being used.

Considering the local risks associated with CCS, Co-Chair Metz  noted that: risks from a carbon dioxide pipeline would be  comparable to those of hydrocarbon pipelines, while the risks for  carbon dioxide storage could be comparable with storing substances  such as acid gas; ocean storage could have significant risks, but  that there is insufficient information on ecosystem impacts; and  that the risks of mineral carbonation would be those related to  the environmental impacts of mining operations. On the  implications of leakage from storage, he said the figures in the  draft SPM are indicative only. On emissions estimation and  accounting, he said the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National  Greenhouse Gas Inventories will include guidance on incorporating  CCS in inventories.

# CONSIDERATION OF THE DRAFT SUMMARY FOR POLICY MAKERS

Noting that nearly 800 comments were received on the draft SPM,  Co-Chair Metz highlighted some general ones, including comments on  restructuring the order of the SPM and on distinguishing between  ocean and geological storage. He noted that a glossary would be  included in the printed version and said more technical  information and policy options should be avoided given the purpose  and nature of the SPM.

On a proposal by Canada to include a foreword clarifying the scope  of the SPM, Co-Chair Metz said that the Co-Chairs would prepare  the foreword but that it would not be presented as part of the  draft SPM for approval. SWITZERLAND, with CHINA and DENMARK,  requested the Co-Chairs provide an opportunity for delegates to  comment on the foreword, while AUSTRALIA proposed an informal  discussion on the issue. Co-Chair Metz said an informal discussion  would be welcome if time allowed it and, with KENYA, noted the  importance of concentrating on approval of the SPM. FRANCE  stressed the need to clarify the cost of assumptions and time  frames for storage. Delegates then began line-by-line discussions  of the draft SPM, in the order of the key questions around which  the SPM is structured.

What is carbon dioxide capture and storage and how could it  contribute to mitigating climate change? Co-Chair Metz introduced  revised text incorporating some of the comments from governments  and organizations. Discussion focused on, inter alia: specific  reference to fossil fuel emissions, the long-term nature of CCS,  and stabilization of greenhouse gases; differentiating ocean  storage from geological storage; and whether CCS 'is' or 'could  be' a mitigation option. Many delegates expressed concern that  certain passages might be policy prescriptive.

On referencing emission sources, SWITZERLAND, supported by  PAKISTAN, CHILE, NORWAY and others, noted that 'anthropogenic  sources' was too vague as it could include land use, land use  change, and forestry. Delegates agreed to a proposal by AUSTRALIA  and NORWAY to replace 'anthropogenic sources' with 'industry and  energy related sources.' Discussion also focused on whether CCS 'is' or 'could be' a  mitigation option, with FRANCE, SWITZERLAND, GERMANY, ZAMBIA,  AUSTRIA, and others saying that it 'could be', while SAUDI ARABIA,  AUSTRALIA, and the US supported 'is' with some qualifying text.  FRANCE stated that it could not accept that 'CCS is a mitigation  option' as long as CCS included ocean storage. No agreement was  reached and a contact group was convened.

CHINA questioned a paragraph quoted from the TAR. Co-Chair Metz  explained that the paragraph was included in an attempt to answer  the question of whether CCS was needed, and that the language  agreed to in the TAR was used to avoid the risk of a long debate.  CHINA said the paragraph did not provide additional information  and it should either be revised or deleted. This issue was also  forwarded to the contact group.

Delegates discussed other revisions to the text in this section.  SWITZERLAND, supported by KOREA, BELGIUM, and others, noted that  referring only to stabilization and not to reduction of greenhouse  gas concentrations is prescriptive. SLOVENIA, supported by  GERMANY, proposed a reference to Article 2 of the UNFCCC (ultimate  objective). The US proposed the use of more general terminology  like 'climate change goals,' rather than specifying 'stabilization  and reduction of greenhouse gas emmisions.' SWEDEN proposed  inserting a reference to 'management' instead of 'enhancement' of  biological sinks. SAUDI ARABIA, opposed by SLOVENIA and RUSSIA,  was not supportive of the reference in the text to nuclear power  as a mitigation option. The US said that the potential for CCS to  'significantly' reduce mitigation costs should be included in the  text. BANGLADESH proposed stronger reference to energy efficiency.  No agreement was reached on inclusion of these proposals.

What are the characteristics of carbon dioxide capture and  storage? In the afternoon, Co-Chair Davidson presented revised  text for this section based on prior comments from governments and  organizations. Several delegates suggested modifying the section  title. SLOVENIA, opposed by the UK, proposed specifying  'anthropogenic sources of carbon dioxide.' The UK suggested citing  'suitable sources of carbon dioxide.' After further discussion,  delegates agreed to revert to the original section title.

Discussion then shifted to the substantive parts of this section,  which define large point sources of carbon dioxide and outline  potential storage methods. Delegates agreed to the Co-Chairs'  proposal to include a table profiling worldwide large stationary  carbon dioxide sources with emissions of more than 0.1 MtCO2 per  year. AUSTRALIA noted the need for the text to show that the range  of technical options may be greater than those that could be used  legally. FRANCE and DENMARK highlighted the importance of not  excluding the possibility that aquifers and geothermal formations  could be used to store carbon dioxide even if they have other  uses. Lead Author of the Technical Summary of the Special Report,  Sally Benson, noted that since the intention is not to store  carbon dioxide in agriculture or water-drinking sources, the term  'saline' is used to define those formations that have no other  suitable usage. She also noted that geothermal areas are not seen  as a first choice for carbon dioxide storage in deep underground  locations. Delegates then agreed to include a footnote that  defines saline formations and notes that because the use of  geothermal energy is likely to increase, potential geothermal  areas may not be suitable for CCS.

The US, opposed by GERMANY and AUSTRIA, called for removal of the  reference to leakage from the transport of carbon dioxide as a  factor in the net reduction of emissions through CCS, given the  minor impact of leakage. The UK proposed, and delegates agreed, to  include reference to 'any leakage' from transport. DENMARK and  AUSTRIA asked for more detail on the differences between energy  consumption associated with CCS in coal and gas power plants.  AUSTRIA, supported by BELGIUM, suggested noting that the  percentages in this section were calculated under the assumption  that leakage does not occur, while the UK, with AUSTRIA, proposed  mentioning 'secure storage' instead of 'leakage.' DENMARK, opposed  by AUSTRALIA, and supported by CHILE and AUSTRIA, called for  referencing biomass in this section. BELGIUM requested inclusion  of a reference to the time scale of storage noted elsewhere in the  SPM. Delegates agreed to a footnote on storage of mineral  carbonates, as amended by FRANCE and the UK to exclude deep  geological storage of carbonates.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

The corridors of the ICAO building were quiet throughout the first  day of WGIII-8, as most delegates were to be found in the plenary  room participating in an exhaustive, and possibly exhausting,  line-by-line review of the draft SPM text. Several participants  wondered about the pace of progress, noting that only four of 32  paragraphs had been addressed. One observer noted that while the  discussion ranged from the substance of CCS to comma placement,  all aspects of the discussion are important given the need to  provide policy makers with a comprehensive and readable summary of  CCS. Another delegate remarked on the level of involvement of a  wide range of delegates in the deliberations, noting that this  should help to ensure that the resulting text reflects the  consensus of IPCC members, in keeping with the spirit of the  organization.