---
title: "REPORT OF THE FIRST MEETING OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES OF THE : UN FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE:: 28 AUGUST - 1 SEPTEMBER 1995"
id: 1223000e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/1223000e
date: 1995-09-01
abstract: "The first Conference of the Parties (COP 1) to the UN  Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC), which was  held in Berlin from 28 March to 7 April 1995, requested the  Secretariat to make arrangements for sessions of the  Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice  (SBSTA) and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI).  COP 1 characterized the role of the SBSTA as the link  between scientific, technical and technological assessments,  the information provided by competent international bodies,  and the policy-oriented needs of the COP. The SBSTA is  expected to develop recommendations on the following issues:  scientific assessments; national communications from Annex I  Parties; methodologies; first communications from non-Annex  I Parties; activities implemented jointly under the pilot  phase; transfer of technology; allocation and control of  international bunker fuels; possible contributions to the  'Berlin Mandate' process; cooperation with competent  international bodies, including the IPCC; proposals on  longer term activities; and a workshop on NGO inputs. During  the course of its first meeting, the SBSTA also attempted to  establish intergovernmental technical advisory panels on  technologies (TAP-T) and methodologies (TAP-M)."
---

COP 1 characterized the role of the SBI as developing  recommendations to assist the COP in the review and  assessment of the implementation of the Convention and in  the preparation and implementation of its decisions. The SBI  is expected to develop recommendations on the following  issues: national communications from Annex I Parties; first  communications from non-Annex I Parties; matters relating to  the financial mechanism; transfer of technology; activities  implemented jointly under the pilot phase; institutional and  budgetary matters; methodological issues; technical  cooperation activities of the Secretariat and its partners;  proposals on long-term activities and organizational  arrangements; proposals for future cooperation between the  SBI, the SBSTA and the IPCC; and possible contributions to  the 'Berlin Mandate' process. The SBI also considered the  draft memorandum of understanding (MOU) between the COP and  the GEF Council, prepared by the Secretariat in consultation  with the GEF Secretariat and contained in document  FCCC/SBI/1995/3.

# SUBSIDIARY BODY ON SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE - 28 - 30 AUGUST 1995

The first meeting of the Subsidiary Body on Scientific and  Technological Advice (SBSTA 1) was opened by the Chair of  the SBSTA, Mr. Tibor Farago (Hungary). He noted that the  roles of the subsidiary bodies could be broadly  characterized as follows: the SBSTA would be the link  between the scientific and technological assessments, the  information provided by competent international bodies and   the policy-oriented needs of the COP and the SBI would  develop recommendations to assist the COP in its review and  assessment of the implementation of the Convention and in  the preparation of its decisions. He said that the first  meeting of the Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate (AGBM 1)  had sent an urgent request regarding the preparation of a  task-list. He added that the division of labor between the  subsidiary bodies, as contained in document  FCC/SB/1995/Inf.1, was a good basis for cooperation between  the bodies. He introduced the Vice Chair, Mr. Soobaraj  Nayroo Sok Appadu (Mauritius) and the Rapporteur, Mr. Victor  Chub (Uzbekistan).

The Executive Secretary of the Permanent Secretariat, Mr.  Michael Zammit-Cutajar noted that the decisions of COP 1  were reflected in the proposed programme of work contained  in document FCCC/SBSTA/1995/2. He stated that it was  important to have both a clear division of labor between the  two subsidiary bodies and a schedule for upcoming meetings  of the SBSTA, taking into consideration the requests made by  the AGBM. He reminded delegates that the IPCC and its  assessments, particularly with regard to technological and  methodological issues, was an important resource. He added  that the technical advisory panels (TAPs) should be able to  respond to flexible needs and be adequately financed. He  noted that lessons from the Montreal Protocol should be  tempered by the fact that the range of technical issues  under consideration by that body were narrower than those  under consideration by the SBSTA. He added that the upcoming  NGO Workshop was an opportunity to decide what mechanisms  would work. He pointed out that the approved budget for  1996-1997 included a contribution of US$620,000 for work  that  requested from the IPCC and hence the 'ball was in the  court' of the Convention's bodies. He concluded by stating  that the Secretariat had organized a technical discussion on  activities implemented jointly (AIJ) to be held after the  second day's evening session. The Chair asked delegates to  consider the provisional agenda as contained in  FCCC/SBSTA/1995/1, which was adopted.

## ELABORATION AND SCHEDULING OF THE PROGRAMME OF WORK, 1996- 1997

The Chair asked delegates to consider the SBSTA's proposed  programme of work, contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/1995/2.  He stated that the SBSTA was expected to develop  recommendation on the following: scientific assessments;  national communications from Annex I Parties; methodologies;  first communications from non-Annex I Parties; AIJ under the  pilot phase; transfer of technology; allocation and control  of international bunker fuels; possible contributions to the  'Berlin Mandate' process; cooperation with competent  international bodies, including the IPCC; proposals on  longer-term activities and organizational arrangements;  workshop on non-governmental inputs; and report on the work  of the SBSTA to COP 2. The Chair added a new item to the  programme of work, namely the establishment of  intergovernmental technical assessment panels (TAPs). The  Chair then proposed convening two drafting groups. The first  would draft a list of requests to the IPCC, while the second  would refine the terms of reference for the TAPs.

The PHILIPPINES, on behalf of the G-77 and China, said that  given the limited number of developing country delegates it  would be hard to work simultaneously in drafting groups and  Plenary. The US and JAPAN welcomed the proposal for two  drafting groups. SAUDI ARABIA suggested postponing the  formation of drafting groups. AUSTRALIA said that it was not  easy to agree to set up drafting groups without adequate  Plenary discussions. The PHILIPPINES reiterated that the  work should be prioritized and that the G-77 could not  participate in drafting groups outside the Plenary. SPAIN,  on behalf of the EU, supported the existing schedule and  suggested postponing the establishment of drafting groups.  The Chair said that there would be no drafting groups.

Delegates proceeded to speak at length on issues related to  the SBSTA's agenda. The US said that the SBSTA should define  its relationship with the IPCC and consider how to obtain  appropriate technical information through the TAPs. The IPCC  said that its second report was being completed and noted  that a principle task of the IPCC is to provide independent  assessment and analysis and that the SBSTA is a vital  channel of communication between the COP and the IPCC. He  said that the IPCC's role is one of research and assessment.

CANADA identified possible subjects for updates in short- term assessments. SAUDI ARABIA said that the SBSTA cannot  approve any material not yet approved by the IPCC's Plenary.  The Chair commented that this meeting was a planning  session, not a scientific session. AUSTRALIA, supported by  URUGUAY, cautioned against duplicating the work of the IPCC  and said that the panels will ensure that SBSTA will  continue to get non-politicized science.

INDIA said that in order to reduce scientific uncertainties,  the role of particulate materials in the atmosphere and  tropospheric ozone would need to be addressed. He supported  funding mechanisms that support national inventories.  TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO, on behalf of the Alliance of Small  Island States (AOSIS), supporting the G-77 and China, said  that SBSTA needs to prioritize and pay attention to  scientific assessments, national communications from Annex I  Parties, and technology transfer. The MALDIVES doubted  whether SBSTA could meet its goals and suggested omitting  discussion on AIJ and bunker fuels in favor of discussion on  transfer of technology. ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA cautioned  against elevating particular paragraphs and said that if  emphasis was being placed on 'scientific uncertainty' then  perhaps Article 3.3 on precauthionary measures should also  be considered. AUSTRALIA noted several priority areas for  SBSTA including: work towards a protocol; in-depth review of  Annex I Parties communications and preparation of guidelines  for non-Annex I Parties; and the synthesis of IPCC findings.

The Chair then invited statements from representatives of   IGOs. The WORLD METEOROLOGICAL ORGANIZATION (WMO) informed  SBSTA on the inter-agency effort to develop a framework for  international climate related programmes, namely the Climate  Agenda. He said that the WMO would extend its full support  to the scientific and technical activities related to the  FCCC. The INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY (IAEA)  highlighted the peaceful use of nuclear energy. He said that  it was wise to use nuclear power to avoid greenhouse gas  (GHG) emissions and offered to contribute on the issues of  transfer of technology and bunker fuels.

The INTERNATIONAL OCEANOGRAPHIC COMMISSION (IOC) of UNESCO,  said that the interrelationship between climate and oceans  was one of IOC's highest priorities and informed delegates  about a number of workshops on this matter. He said that at  COP 1, the IOC had offered to be one of the sources of  information and continued to be ready to cooperate. The Co- Chair of the Technology and Assessment Panel of the MONTREAL  PROTOCOL stated that although climate change may require  entirely different policy approaches, a description of the  principles by which the Montreal Protocol operate might be  useful. He said the panel had 450 technical experts from 40  countries who provided objective technical information.

The CLIMATE ACTION NETWORK (CAN) said that one of the key  items on the SBSTA agenda was the TAPs. She supported the  establishment of TAPs of about 20 government nominated  experts perceived to be operating independently, with a  focus on providing technical assessments. She recommended  the establishment of TAPs by the end of 1995 and said that  the IPCC should maintain its independence. She added that  the workshop on NGO inputs should not narrow inputs and  asked for movement from 'rhetoric to action.' In all, delegates discussed issues related to the  elaboration and scheduling of work initially for the entire  three day period allocated to SBSTA 1. SBSTA continued to  hold both informal consultations and a late evening Plenary  on the final day of the week, which was initially allocated  to the SBI. In their discussions, delegates did not address  each of the items in the order in which they were listed in  the proposed programme of work (FCCC/SBSTA/1995/2).  Furthermore, the Chair proposed linking discussions on  particular items, such as scientific assessments and  methodologies, to facilitate the discussion. However,  delegates did not always focus on the subjects at hand,  which served to complicate an already complicated agenda.

## SCIENTIFIC ASSESSMENTS AND  METHODOLOGIES

The Chair noted the SBSTA's need to consider scientific  assessments and provide guidance to COP and AGBM on the IPCC  reports. The Chair also stressed the urgency of the issue of  methodologies with regard to national communications from  Annex I Parties. The PHILIPPINES, on behalf of the G-77 and  China, stated that the SBSTA was a standing body and did not  have to discuss all topics at SBSTA 1. BENIN, supported by  UGANDA and CHAD, said that scientific assessments were  difficult for developing countries in Africa and stressed   the need to improve human resource development. The US said  that the SBSTA should not duplicate the IPCC, but should  convert IPCC findings into a form appropriate for the COP.  He urged the SBSTA to ask the IPCC to provide its work on  methodologies so that SBSTA could review and make it  available to all Parties.

SPAIN, on behalf of the EU, said that the SBSTA should  provide scientific and technical advice and develop  frameworks and methodologies to satisfy the Convention. He  supported the development of proposals for cooperation with  competent international bodies. SWITZERLAND addressed the  need for a clear division of work on methodologies between  the SBSTA, TAP-M and the IPCC. She highlighted past IPCC  work on methodologies and favored its continuation. CANADA  noted that guidelines have been useful in preparing national  communications and supported a TAP-M for the SBSTA. He said  that the OECD/IEA joint project on national communications  was a valuable source of information.

AUSTRALIA said that the scientific basis for decisions must  remain objective and non-politicized. She stated that the  establishment of TAP-M was a priority for SBSTA 1 and  suggested that the SBSTA request a compilation of work  underway. MALAYSIA noted that the COP needed a mechanism to  provide continuous inputs of scientific information. He said  the IPCC should remain the agency responsible for updating  and refining methodologies. PERU noted that many developed  countries have expressed confidence in the work of the IPCC  because these countries had financed its experts. He said  that developing countries have only had marginal  participation.

CHINA noted that developing country participation in the  IPCC could be improved. He said that SBSTA should give  timely, 'high-quality and holistic' advice to the COP, but  not become another IPCC. JAPAN supported the IPCC's  provision of short-term updates and the division of labor  between the IPCC, the SBSTA and the TAPs. URUGUAY said that  training activities in developing countries needed to be  included. He said that the SBSTA needed to promote the  development of technologies useful for developing countries.  SAUDI ARABIA recommended that the SBSTA seek guidance in  preparing its report in order to ensure objectivity,  transparency and to reflect divergent views.

INDIA said that new questions had emerged, including the  'thermostat effect,' which were not adequately covered by  the IPCC. He said that the IPCC's transparency should  continue and suggested that the summary document intended  for SBSTA 2 be prepared jointly by the SBSTA and IPCC. The  RUSSIAN FEDERATION said that the success of SBSTA's work  would depend on the mutually complementary work done by the  IPCC and other related organizations. BANGLADESH said that  the SBSTA could use various international organizations but  should confirm the objectivity of any analysis provided.

TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO, on behalf of AOSIS, said that the SBSTA  could request the IPCC to evaluate impacts and global  warming potentials. He requested additional information on   land and marine resource use for small island States.  SWITZERLAND said that the requests made by the AGBM to the  SBSTA required the efficient use of the intersessional  period and the close cooperation of the bureaus of both  bodies. SPAIN, on behalf of the EU, said that SBSTA should  work immediately on national communications and  contributions to the Berlin Mandate process. CANADA said  that summaries of intermediate reviews should be prepared  and suggested that SBSTA consider AIJ.

## NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS FROM ANNEX I PARTIES  AND  COMMUNICATIONS FROM NON-ANNEX I PARTIES - PROGRESS REPORT ON  IN-DEPTH REVIEWS

The Chair suggested merging discussion on national  communications from Annex I Parties with discussion on the  brief progress report on in-depth reviews undertaken to  date, as contained in FCCC/SB/1995/1. He asked delegates to  focus on the procedural aspects of the following: scientific  and technical aspects in the review, effectiveness of  policies and measures, and the preparation of guidelines on  national communications.

AUSTRALIA supported the Secretariat's progress report on in- depth reviews and encouraged the Secretariat to continue.  She said that SBSTA 2 should consider a draft synthesis  report and recommended a comprehensive approach to all GHG  sources. SPAIN, on behalf of the EU, said that all EU  members had submitted their national communications and the  EU had presented a synthesis report at COP 1. The EU,  supported by CANADA and JAPAN, supported the compilation of  a synthesis report and the continuation of in-depth reviews.  The US said that the SBSTA's ongoing review of national  communications would provide key information on individual  policies and measures. The PHILIPPINES, on behalf of the G-77 and China, supported the inclusion of in-depth reviews of  Annex I Parties' national communications as a standing item  on the SBSTA's agenda. CHINA stated that Annex II Parties  should include measures on the transfer of technology for  consideration by SBSTA. ZIMBABWE noted that non-Annex I  Parties do not have a fixed time to report and agreed that  the process should be accelerated.

The INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC AGENCY (IEA) stated that  international statistics, including the work done by the UN  Statistical Office, were available and SBSTA could use these  to evaluate national communications. The Secretariat noted  that each team of IPCC experts has at least one developing  country member, adding that only 29 Parties had made  nominations, and that the IPCC aims to involve as many  Parties as possible. The Chair said there would be informal  consultations on these items and all comments would be  incorporated in a draft paper. The PHILIPPINES and AUSTRALIA  noted that these issues will have to be revisited in  Plenary.

## ESTABLISHMENT OF TAP-T AND TAP-M

The Chair noted that this was an urgent matter for SBSTA to  consider in the light of  COP 1. TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO, on  behalf of AOSIS, supported the nomination of 21-30   government experts in the TAPs. He recommended that the  terms of office be 'staggered' to promote continuity and  noted that establishment of sub-committees should not be  ruled out. The US said that regarding the organization of  TAPs, it was not clear whether TAPs should work in parallel.  He stated that since methodological issues were connected to  Annex I Parties at least half of the experts in TAP-M should  come from Annex I Parties. He said that TAP-M should consist  of 20 experts and its meetings should be open to all IGOs  and NGOs accredited to the COP. TAP-T should have an  entirely different structure as there was the need to  involve a greater number of experts. He proposed that TAP-T  have a managerial steering group composed of about 10  experts nominated by governments. He added that private  sector expertise was important.

SPAIN, on behalf of the EU, said that it would be very  difficult to cover the wide range of technical and  scientific issues with only 15 experts. He suggested that  the number of permanent experts could be restricted and more  external experts could be included. He said that these  external experts should be selected by the SBSTA's bureau,  based on nominations by the Parties. NEW ZEALAND said that  the TAPs should be established as soon as possible, adding  that geographic balance and experience must both be  incorporated. She supported broadening the structure of the  TAPs to include all technologies. PERU said that panels must  be established at this session. He stated that greater  weight should be given to the TAP-T, and suggested 25-30  experts, three-year terms, and funding for developing  countries.

CANADA stated that panels should be composed of government- appointed experts. He said that TAP-M should not cover  incremental costs or any financial issue and both TAPs  should report to SBSTA 2. JAPAN said that the SBSTA should  focus on technology identification, assessment and  development, rather than technology transfer. He suggested  devising a flexible approach without a fixed number of  experts. CHINA said the panels would have to be  intergovernmental in nature and be composed of 20  government-nominated experts. He recommended the selection  of experts on the basis of regional consultations. The Chair  said that if governments were to nominate and select the  experts, these panels might not be created until the SBSTA  2. He once again asked delegates to propose specific  mandates for the panels.

POLAND, supported by UZBEKISTAN, said that subgroups were  useful and suggested that a deadline for nominating experts  be presented at the AGBM 2. The RUSSIAN FEDERATION suggested  various criteria for individual and collective measures  including volume of emissions per capita, emissions per  territory and emissions per GNP taking into consideration  the principle of 'common but differentiated responsibility.'  He supported the US on the membership of panels and said  national experts could be provided to both TAPs. INDIA  preferred open-ended membership, which should be limited   according to the number of experts each country could send.  He suggested that the terms of reference for the TAP-T  mention 'low-cost' or 'cost-effective' technologies. The  REPUBLIC OF KOREA suggested flexible membership and said  that TAP-T should concentrate only on assessing technologies  and not on their transfer. The Chair, noting the diverging  views, said that open-ended membership and financing were  'problematic.' SPAIN, on behalf of the EU, said that the panels should have  different structures, with TAP-T as the smaller, ad hoc body  and TAP-M as the larger body that draws from other fora. He  said that SBSTA should develop a programme of work for TAP-T  to meet according to the issues identified, and proposed  that a compilation be prepared for SBSTA 2. SAUDI ARABIA,  supported by KUWAIT, stated that the TAPs should be open- ended. He said that it was too early for the proposed level  of detail on the terms of reference and added that the  economic impacts of measures should included. The  PHILIPPINES, on behalf of the G-77, said that TAPs should be  intergovernmental, with government-nominated members  numbering no more than 15. She also expressed concern  regarding the funding of the TAPs and said that the  participation of developing countries must be ensured.  ARGENTINA, supported by FIJI, suggested 20-member TAPs,  appointed by governments, with geographic representation. He  also said the Secretariat should begin collecting  information on technology transfer.

FRANCE, supporting the EU, said that the TAP-M should  develop common methodologies to assess cost-effectiveness  and comparability of national policies. The PHILIPPINES, on  behalf of the G-77 and China, put forward an initial list of  suggestions for the TAPs concerning timing, carbon cycles,  associated impacts of climate change, assistance for the  development of national capabilities and adaptation  measures. The CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC said that the socio- economic impacts of climate change on developing countries  need to be addressed. The IAEA suggested that competent IGOs  be asked to nominate experts for both TAPs and said that  IAEA would provide two experts at no cost. URUGUAY said that  it was inappropriate to consider IGO participation in the  panels at this stage. The Chair said that he would hold  'pragmatic' consultations for a draft on TAPs that would be  considered during Plenary.

### DRAFT PROPOSAL ON TAPS

The Chair distributed a proposal on  the establishment of Intergovernmental Technical Advisory  Panels on 30 August 1995. The PHILIPPINES, on behalf of the  G-77 and China, said that due to the lack of time, the  decisions should be 'applied but not adopted,' similar to  the Rules of Procedure at COP 1. She said that there should  be no differentiation, such as a steering committee, among  the TAPs and that the TAPs should begin on an 'equal  footing,' have the same number of members and terms of  reference and be responsible only to the SBSTA. She  reiterated the intention to revisit the issue. The Chair  said that there would be separate documents for TAP-M and   TAP-T with different terms of reference, but for now they  would be in full symmetry.

The US disagreed with the G-77 and China, regarding the  'equal footing' for the panels. He stated that Annex I  Parties' assessments would be under review and subject to  more obligations, and hence the composition of the panels  should reflect this. He also stated that the TAPs should  have one Co-Chair each drawn from Annex I and non-Annex I  Parties. The PHILIPPINES, on behalf of the G-77 and China,  reiterated that acceptance was ad referendum. She said that  the funding for developing country participation in the  TAPs, and the reference to representatives of Parties  attending as observers, should not be deleted. JAPAN said  that the composition of the TAPs should take into account  geographical consideration, expertise, the balance between  Annex I and non-Annex I Parties and the nomination by the  SBSTA's Bureau if regional coordinators could not agree,  which the Chair said could be included. He said that there  was no need to specify that Parties could attend as  observers because the TAPs were open and this was the right  of any Party. He said that membership for TAP-T could be  flexible but because of the nature of the work, there was no  need for the TAPs to be on an 'equal footing.' The Chair said that perhaps consensus on substance was  impossible at this stage and appealed for practical advice  on inviting governments to nominate experts. SPAIN, on  behalf of the EU, said that the TAPs should start work as  soon as possible and supported the US proposal on different  composition for the TAPs and that one of the Co-Chairs be  from an Annex I Party. Regarding TAP-M, the EU supported  economic assessments. She said that TAP-T should not  evaluate the Convention's objectives but evaluate the basis  for the SBI to carry out evaluations. The Chair said that  the Secretariat could add an 'option 3' with a lengthier  term of office. The Chair suggested as a compromise of 10-15  member TAPs between the EU's five-member and the G-77 and  China 20-30 member TAPs.

AUSTRALIA said that compromise might not be possible in the  remaining 17 minutes. The Chair said letters inviting  governmental nominations to the TAPs did not need an  immediate resolution on the pending issue of membership. The  PHILIPPINES, on behalf of the G-77 and China, reminded all  delegates that the draft was being accepted ad referendum.  AUSTRALIA inquired on what basis the invitations would be  issued and asked whether the issue of the TAPs would be  opened again during SBSTA 2. The Chair once again appealed  for 'solutions not questions.' SWITZERLAND said that there  was no use of forming panels only to disband them later and  suggested that discussion on TAPs could be conducted in  parallel with SBI 1. In the final four minutes, PERU  supporting Switzerland, asked the Chair to continue informal  consultations and requested the allocation of half an hour  of SBI's meeting time for SBSTA Plenary. The SBI Chair, Mr.  Mohamed M. Ould El Ghaouth (Mauritania), offered SBSTA the  opportunity to hold informal  consultations on Thursday and  a Friday afternoon Plenary.

## TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY

The Chair said that this was an urgent matter to be  considered by the SBSTA and its proposed TAP-T. He suggested  that discussions focus on procedural issues. CHINA, citing  numerous articles of the FCCC, said that technology transfer  was critical in meeting the Convention's objectives. He  recalled that developed countries had made advances in clean  and cost-effective energy technologies and could greatly  improve the global environment. He cited the need for new  and renewable energy sources, with regard to mitigation  activities, and the need for the identification of relevant  technologies, with regard to adaptation activities. SPAIN,  on behalf of the EU, stated that the SBSTA should focus on  technology development and assessment adding that the COP  would focus on transfer of technology, including terms and  conditions of transfer. The PHILIPPINES, on behalf of the G-77 and China, emphasized the importance of this issue to  developing countries and requested the Secretariat to  prepare text on this issue. TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO, on behalf  of AOSIS, said that the SBSTA and TAP-T should identify the  best available technologies in the energy, transport,  industrial, forestry and waste management sectors. He said  that the assessment of mitigation and adaptation  technologies should be coordinated with the GEF. He said  that the obligation to transfer technology should be  extended to the negotiation of terms whereby the  intellectual property rights associated with the technology  was also made available.

## AIJ UNDER THE PILOT PHASE

The Chair reminded delegates that the Secretariat had  compiled the views from the Parties on a framework for  reporting AIJ under the pilot phase, as contained in  FCCC/SBSTA/1995/Misc.1. The US considered the rapid  development of an AIJ programme to be of major importance  toward the Convention's continuing progress. He proposed the  development of a reporting framework for global benefits and  national experiences that could be reported at COP 2, and  could lead to standardized submittals on AIJ before COP 3.  He said the US has begun a multi-project activity. SPAIN, on  behalf of the EU, and supported by AUSTRALIA and CANADA,  recalled that COP will review the progress of the pilot  phase of AIJ and urged the Secretariat to compile  information on this topic before the next session. The  PHILIPPINES, on behalf of the G-77 and China, reminded  delegates that the phrase was 'AIJ' and not 'JI'  and that  there substantive differences between the two. TRINIDAD AND  TOBAGO, on behalf of AOSIS, supported the Philippines and  added that this should not be reopened for discussion by the  SBSTA. The Chair reminded delegates that this was a planning  session and that technical matters relating to AIJ could be  discussed at the technical panel on 'Reporting Framework for  AIJ under the Pilot Phase,' which was held on the evening of  29 August 1995.

## COOPERATION WITH COMPETENT INTERNATIONAL  BODIES, INCLUDING  THE IPCC

The Chair stated that the SBSTA was required to serve as a  link between competent international bodies and the COP. He  noted that the SBSTA was required to submit proposals to the  COP on the cooperation between the subsidiary bodies and  IPCC and asked for a clear mandate to communicate with  international bodies and the IPCC.

CANADA described the work done by the joint OECD/IEA project  on national communications. He said that this project was  established in 1993 at the request of Annex I Parties and  has provided analysis, coordinated workshops and information  to help Annex I Parties to meet their reporting commitments  under the FCCC. The US said that the IPCC should continue to  be one of the primary bodies providing independent and  credible scientific information process as it uses the best  experts from both developed and developing countries. He  noted that the AGBM and COP would need the IPCC to provide  reports within a six-month time frame and said that there  should be close cooperation between the  IPCC and SBSTA.  SPAIN, on behalf of the EU, said that the IPCC should  concentrate on advising government on climatic change. He  said that the subsidiary bodies should provide specific  information to the COP and AGBM based on the work done by  the IPCC and encouraged the establishment of informal  process of 'joint work.' The Vice-Chair later introduced an initial list of areas  where the IPCC could provide relevant inputs to the  Convention Bodies. CHINA, supported by INDIA, suggested the  'detection of anthropogenic climate change,' needed to be  put into a historical perspective. The PHILIPPINES, on  behalf of the G-77 and China, noted that the reference to  adaptation measures had been omitted. She added that the  IPCC is already working on these and requested their results  as inputs to the SBSTA. The US, supported by INDIA, CANADA  and JAPAN, said the list should acknowledge the need for  open and effective communications and that high priority  should be given to regular joint meetings between SBSTA and  the IPCC. He also noted the need to differentiate between  the long- and short-term work of the IPCC.

SAUDI ARABIA said that a reference regarding emissions from  bunker fuels would be part of the SBSTA work and should not  be included here. URUGUAY disagreed with China, and  suggested a reference to the detection of climate change and  trends therein due to non-anthropogenic causes as well as a  reference to oceanographic information. SPAIN, on behalf of  EU, proposed that methodologies should not include  statistical adjustments. She suggested adding 'evaluations  of individual and aggregate effects of measures undertaken  pursuant to the Convention.' TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO, on behalf  of AOSIS, stated that the SBSTA should ask the IPCC to  provide global warming rates, emission trajectories up to  2020, and global warming potentials. He supported the  request to include adaptation measures and asked China to  reconsider its suggestion. GERMANY, supported by AUSTRALIA,  stated that close cooperation between the IPCC and SBSTA was   crucial, stressing the need to maintain a clear division of  labor between them. He disagreed with the Saudi proposal and  stated that the proposed reference to oceanographic  information was already covered.

## FIRST COMMUNICATIONS FROM NON-ANNEX I PARTIES

The Chair stated that the SBSTA was expected to develop  recommendations on the preparation of guidelines for  national communications from non-Annex I Parties. He asked  delegates to consider both the G-77 and China approach  paper, contained in A/AC.237/Misc.40, and the submission  made by the UK, contained in document FCCC/SB/1995/Misc.1.  He noted that the elaboration of guidelines should start as  early as possible because a number of non-Annex I Parties  had to submit their first national communications in 1997.

The PHILIPPINES, on behalf of the G-77 and China, said that  there were diverse capacities within developing countries  regarding technology and finances. She said that the  submission of non-Annex I Parties' communications was  contingent upon fulfillment of Article 4 of the FCCC. She  proposed a two-stage approach for the preparation of  guidelines and noted that the reference to 'national  reporting' in the UK submission should be altered to  'national communications.' SPAIN, on behalf of the EU, said that the guidelines for  non-Annex I Parties communications should be flexible so as  to take into account the wide diversity among developing  countries. He said that this should be a priority item  because some developing countries were in the process of  approaching the GEF for funds. He requested the Secretariat  to develop specific proposals on guidelines for  consideration at SBSTA 2.

MALAYSIA requested the Secretariat to prepare possible  'guidelines' at SBSTA 2 and a document identifying the  technical difficulties faced by developing countries in  preparing their first communications. CHINA said that  initial communications from non-Annex I Parties were  contingent upon Annex I Parties fulfilling their financial  and technological commitments under the FCCC. He said that  the modalities and coverage for Annex I Parties do not apply  to non-Annex I Parties. He added that he was 'shocked' to  see studies on methane emissions in China and India that  were not based on field work in these countries. He welcomed  bilateral and multilateral assistance in preparing national  communications in the spirit of North-South partnership.

The Chair reminded delegates yet again that time was a  'precious resource' and asked them to focus on specific  procedural matters. BENIN said that guidelines should be  prepared as soon as possible, adding that workshops could be  held to facilitate the preparation of these guidelines.  URUGUAY, noting that the responsibility for anthropogenic  emissions did not rest with developing countries, suggested  that this issue be considered by SBSTA 2. The US said that  there was benefit to seeking compatible approaches between  Annex I and non-Annex I Parties. He concurred with the need  to meet the 'agreed full costs' of preparing first national   communications from non-Annex I Parties.

AUSTRALIA, supporting the EU on the preparation of  guidelines, said that the national communications of all  Parties was central to the FCCC and that the development of  guidelines should be undertaken in a timely fashion. She  stated that the GEF mechanism included provisions for the  preparation of national communications. NIGERIA said that  modalities, training and funds for preparing non-Annex I  Parties' national communications needed to be addressed.  BRAZIL said that basis for the Secretariat's work on  guidelines could be found in the approach paper submitted by  the G-77 and China. He suggested that the format should be  flexible and allow for 'the agreed full costs' to be met by  the GEF. INDIA said that there was no substitute for  countries conducting their own inventories and funds should  be provided accordingly. TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO, on behalf of  AOSIS, endorsed the preparation of guidelines for  consideration by SBSTA.

## WORKSHOP ON NON-GOVERNMENTAL INPUTS

The Chair referred to Annex III/Decision 6 of COP 1, which   mentions a workshop for NGO inputs. NEW ZEALAND, supported  by the US, the EU, the NETHERLANDS, AUSTRALIA, CANADA, JAPAN  and ARGENTINA, suggested that the workshop be held in  conjunction with the subsidiary body and AGBM meetings in  February, and recommended a report from the meeting. SAUDI  ARABIA said that SBSTA should not engage in any details at  this stage and cautioned against scheduling the workshop  during the Ramadan period. SWITZERLAND added that the  responsibility for organization should be given to the  Secretariat and that the workshop should discuss a business  consultative mechanism. Both Switzerland and the Netherlands  offered financial support for the workshop. MALAYSIA, the  PHILIPPINES, ARGENTINA and TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO said that  widest possible NGO participation should be sought and  requested that the Secretariat provide financial resources  to ensure participation of developing country NGOs.

## FINAL PLENARY

Plenary began at 6:00 pm on 1 September 1995, after a full  day of informal consultations. The Executive Secretary  introduced three 'formal' documents: an addendum to the  Draft report of AGBM 1, contained in document  FCCC/AGBM/1995/L.1/Add.1; the draft conclusion on  cooperation with competent international bodies, including  the IPCC, contained in FCCC/SBSTA/1995/L.1; and, draft  conclusions on the programme of work and other matters  arising from the decision of the COP, contained in document  FCCC/SBSTA/1995/L.2. He also introduced documents containing  the 'updated results' of informal consultations, held on the  last day, concerning the programme of work and other  matters, dated and timed 1 September 14:08, and cooperation  with competent international bodies, dated and timed 1  September 14:15. He noted that compilation of the results of  informal consolations on the programme of work and other  matters were held with the assistance of Germany.

GERMANY explained the amendments to the document, including   inter alia: in paragraph VI, delete a specific reference to  the OECD and IEA as international bodies to be consulted by  SBSTA; in paragraph VII(A), allow for consideration of  papers submitted by delegations for the Secretariat's  recommendations on guidelines for national communications;  in paragraph VIII, impose a deadline of 15 November 1995 for  submissions from Parties for the Secretariat's compilation  document on AIJ; in paragraph VIII, on AIJ, and paragraph  XII, on transfer of technology, add elaborative sentences to  balance the two issues; and, in paragraph XVI, Workshop on  NGO inputs, provide assistance for developing country NGOs  and add 'The views expressed by Parties will be taken into  account in preparing for the workshop.' The US expressed thanks to Germany for her 'adroit handling'  of the text and supported the redraft despite 'strong views'  on paragraph VII(d), requests to the Secretariat. The  PHILIPPINES, on behalf of the G-77 and China, appreciating  the efforts made by Germany, suggested adding in paragraph  VII(a) on requests to the Secretariat: 'Taking into account  the views expressed by the Parties and the paper submitted  by the G-77 and China.' On paragraph XVI, workshop on non- governmental inputs, she proposed amending the reference to  NGO participation to read: 'Adequate participation of NGOs  from developing countries would have to be promoted and  assistance be provided.' SWITZERLAND suggested deleting 'state-of-the-art' in  paragraph XII as it was not part of the language agreed to  at COP 1 and replacing 'address' with 'mitigating and  adapting to' in the last line. The PHILIPPINES, on behalf of  the G-77 and China, said that the word 'state-of-the-art'  was included in the SBSTA report. AUSTRALIA was prepared to  accept the redrafted text as it was read initially, in the  spirit of compromise, but added that an explicit reference  to the G-77 and China paper could be made without precluding  others by referring to the specific document number. She  said that the workshop sought to involve the adequate  participation of all NGOs from both developed and developing  countries and asked the G-77 and China to reconsider.

The Chair suggested a paragraph-by-paragraph reading. SAUDI  ARABIA proposed replacing 'finalize' with 'adopt' in the  first sentence of the first paragraph referring to IPCC's  second assessment report. In paragraph VII(a), on requests  to the Secretariat, CHINA said that the G-77 and China  approach paper was the only paper submitted by non-Annex I  Parties. The Chair's proposal, 'papers submitted by the  Parties, including document A/AC.237/Misc.40' was accepted.  In last line of paragraph XII, on transfer of technology,  the Chair suggested retaining 'state of the art' and  replacing 'address' with 'mitigating and adapting to' before  climate change. TRINIDAD and TOBAGO, on behalf of AOSIS,  requested a specific reference stating that the workshop  last 'for at least three days,' but NEW ZEALAND and SAUDI  ARABIA objected and the request was withdrawn.

The SBSTA then considered the updated draft conclusions on   cooperation with competent international bodies, dated 1   September 14:08. The amendments include, inter alia, an  additional sentence in paragraph II noting 'The Bureau of  SBSTA will hold joint meetings with the officers of IPCC and  report to each of its sessions on the outcome of these  consultations with IPCC' and an additional paragraph IV  (bis) stating that following consideration by SBSTA of the  IPCC's Second Assessment, the Secretariat should prepare a  list of priority areas and time-frames in which IPCC inputs  are required. The Annex to the conclusions contains the  initial list of areas on which IPCC could provide relevant  inputs. The amendments to the Annex include, inter alia: in  the chapeau, add a sentence stating, 'each issue is an  important element of the Third Assessment Report, and some  may be appropriate for an interim or special report'; add  paragraph II(bis), stating 'Development and assessment of  methodological and technological aspects of transfer of  technology'; in paragraph III, concerning the development of  methodologies, include 'projections in the estimation of  present and future greenhouse gas emissions, and global  warming potentials as well as the evaluation of [individual  and] aggregated effects of measures....'; in paragraph IV,  add 'technical and socio-economic' to the bases for further  interpreting Article 2; in paragraph X, specify that 'the  environmental and socio-economic' effects of policies and  measures will be analyzed; add paragraph XII, 'Modeling of  different atmospheric stabilization scenarios'; and, add  paragraph XIV, 'Identification of technical and socio- economic aspects of Articles 4.8, 4.9 and 4.10 of the  Convention.' The Chair once again suggested a paragraph-by-paragraph  reading. On paragraph I(bis) on SBSTA's cooperation with  competent international bodies, the RUSSIAN FEDERATION said  that the sentence did not specify which international  organizations were competent. The Chair said that during  informal consultations it became clear that any list of  organizations would be either endless or difficult to  accept. POLAND and SAUDI ARABIA suggested amending the last  sentence of paragraph 2 on IPCC assistance, which now reads,  'The Bureau of SBSTA will request the IPCC Bureau to hold  joint meetings and report to each of its sessions on the  outcome of these meetings.' With regard to paragraph III on the development and  refinement of methodologies, AUSTRALIA said that brackets on  'individual and' should be deleted but Kuwait disagreed.  CANADA proposed replacing 'projections in the estimation of  present and future greenhouse gas emissions' with 'in the  estimation of present and projections of greenhouse gas  emissions' and deleting '[individual and] aggregated.' The  PHILIPPINES accepted the first Canadian amendment but  preferred to retain 'individual' without brackets, with the  addition of a specific reference to the Convention. SPAIN,  on behalf of the EU, preferred to retain the language  without brackets. The text was accepted as amended by  CANADA.

In paragraph X, on the analysis of environmental and  socio- economic effects, SPAIN, on behalf of the EU, proposed  replacing 'environmental and socio-economic' with  'aggregated.'  CHINA did not support this. The Chair's  proposal to delete this paragraph was accepted.

POLAND proposed replacing the text in paragraph XII on  modeling with text from the FCCC: 'Modeling of different  scenarios of the stabilization of greenhouse gas  concentrations in the atmosphere.' SAUDI ARABIA proposed  deleting the entire paragraph. TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO,  SWITZERLAND, AUSTRALIA, and the PHILIPPINES supported the  Polish amendment. The Chair suggested appending the amended  paragraph XII to the end of paragraph IV on scientific,  technical and socio-economic bases. SAUDI ARABIA accepted  the linkage of the paragraphs but proposed adding 'possible'  before the amended paragraph XII. ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA,  supported by AUSTRALIA, said that it was impossible to  accept the inclusion of the word 'possible.' The word  'necessary' was accepted as a compromise.

The Chair then introduced a 'working paper' on the  establishment of TAPs, along with an annex containing tasks  for immediate actions, and stated that SBSTA had not reached  a consensus on this. He asked what should be done before  SBSTA 2.  He added that without agreement, the first session  of these panels would not be organized and the process would  be postponed. The PHILIPPINES, on behalf of the G-77 and  China, and supported by ZIMBABWE, BRAZIL and TRINIDAD AND  TOBAGO, recalled the original willingness of the G-77 to  apply but not accept the Chair's original proposals to allow  the TAPs to begin. She noted that the G-77 provided  suggestions and made every effort, and expressed regret that  the TAPs are not able to start to their work.

JAPAN expressed disappointment that no agreement was  reached, but proposed that further negotiations be conducted  during the intersessional period prior to the October AGBM  meeting.  AUSTRALIA was also disappointed that a favorable  compromise could not be reached and requested guidance on  the follow-up process of consultations. SAUDI ARABIA,  supported by KUWAIT, supported the continuation of  consultations but said that the AGBM 2 already had a heavy  schedule. SPAIN, on behalf of the EU, supported holding  consultations before AGBM 2.  The Chair first proposed that  the SBSTA request the Secretariat to compile submissions on  the TAPs received from Parties received by 15 November 1995  and also proposed a continuation of consultations on the  TAPs with a view to holding a half-day session during the  week of the AGBM 2. SAUDI ARABIA said its AGBM 'team' would  not be the same its SBSTA one and preferred not to continue  consultations at AGBM 2. SPAIN, on behalf of the EU, was in  favor of holding informal consultations during AGBM 2.   ZIMBABWE, supported by BRAZIL, noted that a procedure of  initial nominations of experts was a constructive use of  time. The Chair amended his proposal replacing '15 November'  with '30 October' and deleting the reference to convening a  half-day session. Both amendments were eventually accepted  after several clarifications sought by SAUDI ARABIA. The US   and CHINA said that identifying experts without a clear  understanding of the TAPs could not be done on the basis of  informal consultations. The Chair concluded the session by  withdrawing his proposal on the submission of experts by  governments.

In concluding, the Executive Secretary stated that the  deadlines for inputs to the AGBM was still 8 September 1995  and added that the decision not to establish panels or a  workshop on AIJ had 'in a sense' facilitated budgeting  tasks. He raised the question of funding for the two  workshops resulting from this meeting, and expressed concern  about 'earmarking' contributions as well as what would  happen when the COP left the UN budgeting system. The SBSTA  Plenary was gavelled to a close at 9:25 pm.

# SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATIO - 31 AUGUST 1995

The Chair of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI),  Mr. Mohamed M. Ould El Ghaouth (Mauritania), noted that this  first meeting of the SBI (SBI 1) would be operational and  not deliberative. He restricted his introduction so that SBI  could begin work. The Executive Secretary, Mr. Michael  Zammit-Cutajar, noted that the schedule would impose  constant pressure on the SBI and reminded delegates that SBI  1 was purely organizational and would address difficult  issues such as the financial mechanism at later sessions.  The Chair circulated a revised schedule of work for the SBI,  which included the following: communications from Annex I  Parties: progress report on in-depth review; institutional  and budgetary matters; matters relating to the financial  mechanism; and the elaboration and scheduling of the  programme of work, 1996-1997.

## COMMUNICATIONS FROM ANNEX I PARTIES - PROGRESS REPORT ON IN- DEPTH REVIEWS

The Secretariat introduced document FCCC/SB/1995/1,  Communications from Annex I Parties: progress report on in- depth review, noting that eight in-depth reviews have been  completed. Delegates were informed that to date only 29  Parties have nominated national experts to participate in  the in-depth reviews.

The PHILIPPINES, on behalf of the G-77 and China, said that  in-depth reviews should be received as soon as possible. She  added that non-Annex I Parties were also committed to their  obligations. SPAIN, on behalf of the EU, said that all 15 EU  members have completed their national communications, and  that three have undergone in-depth reviews. MALAYSIA asked  questions regarding statistical adjustments and  comparability of in-depth reviews. The US noted that in- depth reviews form an essential part of the process, and  urged the SBSTA and the SBI to undertake this topic as a  matter of urgency.

CANADA noted that its in-depth review experience had been  positive and suggested that a document compiling experiences  with the process of in-depth review be prepared for SBI 2.  JAPAN said that the results of reviews had been fruitful,  and requested a synthesis report. AUSTRALIA said that an   Australian expert will be nominated for the review teams.  She stressed the need to receive all outstanding national  communications and produce a synthesis report.

MAURITIUS invited the Secretariat to recirculate letters of  invitation for expert participation in the review process.  ZIMBABWE looked forward to the inclusion of developing  country experts in the review and a paper on the  difficulties faced by non-Annex I Parties in preparing their  national communications. The Executive Secretary noted that  the reviews attempt to understand how the communications are  done and examine the unadjusted values. He added that the  review teams do not make 'value judgements.' On  comparability, he said the Secretariat provides guidance on  how to complete the reviews.

PERU said it might be useful to appoint more experts for  review work. THAILAND said that it had not nominated any  expert on the understanding that there were a limited number  developing country participating in the review process. The  Executive Secretary said that delegates were invited to  request their governments to nominate experts for the review  work. URUGUAY asked what mechanism would facilitate the  review process.

The PHILIPPINES, supported by ETHIOPIA, said that since  developing countries numbered over 130, additional space  should be provided for developing country experts. The Chair  said that governments could nominate experts directly to the  Secretariat and urged delegates not to continue discussing  this matter. FIJI and CHAD asked how much time experts would  spend on this review and the time limit for submissions of  names. The Executive Secretary said that an expert could  count on being away on a country visit for at least one  week.

## INSTITUTIONAL AND BUDGETARY MATTERS

The Executive Secretary introduced the issue of  extrabudgetary funds, as contained in FCCC/SBI/1995/4. He  pointed out that additional contributions had been made and  were reflected in the tables attached to the document. He  raised concern about the lack of funding for developing  countries, but also noted that of the 53 countries offered  funding, 17 did not take advantage of the offer. He said  that if the funds currently pledged were paid in time, an  additional amount of US$150,000 could fund 110 developing  countries. He added that the Secretariat would have to be  gradually built up to meet growing requirements and  mentioned the need to plan for the relocation to Bonn.

URUGUAY was interested in supporting regional action  programmes. The Executive Secretary said that subregional  approaches were a useful idea. The Chair said that Parties  and the Executive Secretary were invited to consider these  matters. The US said that SBSTA's draft conclusions and the  formation of the TAPs had budgetary implications and  requested information on these prior to taking decisions.  The Chair said that if there were proposals that could not  be 'budgetarily' anticipated these would be flagged. He said  that the COP had requested the UN General Assembly to 'pick   up the tab' for six weeks of meetings in 1996 and four  weeks of meetings in 1997.

The US, supported by GERMANY, proposed that an additional  two weeks be requested. GERMANY expressed concern over the  decreasing number of delegates from developing countries and  countries with economies in transition and announced a  contribution of US$150,000 to the voluntary fund. TRINIDAD  AND TOBAGO, the CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC and CHAD said that  parallel meetings were a problem for smaller delegations,  but endorsed the proposal for two extra weeks.

The Executive Secretary thanked Germany for the additional  contribution. He stressed that the meetings would not be  parallel and that the COP Bureau would discuss this in  October.  The Executive Secretary said that the provision of  conference services by the UNGA was the fundamental issue  for the FCCC process. He noted that arrangements for the  administrative support were under consultations with the UN  Department of Administration Management and said a report  would be submitted for SBI 2. The Chair said that delegates  should allow the Executive Secretary to continue  consultations. SPAIN, on behalf of the EU, concurred. BENIN  asked whether it was possible to fund two delegates from  each developing country. The Executive Secretary said that  the choice was to fund one delegate from 110 countries or  two from 55 countries and that it was preferable to include  as large a number of developing countries. The Chair  proposed adding a recommendation that SBI request two  additional weeks to the UNGA at its 50th session.

## MATTERS RELATING TO THE FINANCIAL MECHANISM

Mr. Tahar Hadj-Sadok of the Secretariat introduced the  memorandum of understanding (MOU) between the COP and the  GEF Council, as contained in document FCCC/SBI/1995/3. He  said that the Secretariats of both bodies had considered  this matter and that the GEF Council had provided  information on its most recent meetings. He then introduced  Ms. Patricia Bliss-Guest of the GEF. The PHILIPPINES, on  behalf of the G-77 and China, asked whether this matter  could be considered in more detail in the afternoon session.  SPAIN, on behalf of the EU, welcomed the draft MOU and said  that the draft was 'balanced' and had been approved at the  fifth GEF Council meeting. He encouraged the GEF to carry  out its work in the field of climate change.

BRAZIL highlighted difficulties with the Brazilian  submission to the GEF on preparing a national inventory. He  said that a national inventory would require funds of US$7  million and that the GEF had been requested to provide US$3  million in this regard. He noted that the GEF had agreed to  provide US$1.5 million which was 'the absolute minimum,' but  added that the GEF had recently stated that its draft  operational strategy did not envisage the provision of such  large sums for enabling activities. He said that Brazil  would insist on its proposal, which would contribute to  decreasing the level of uncertainty on the carbon cycle and  deforestation. The Chair said that this was 'news' to him as  GEF Council member and because the operational strategy was   still a draft.

JAPAN supported the format and content of the MOU. He  inquired about the issue of consistency of the MOUs for both  the Biodiversity and Climate Change Conventions raised at  the fifth GEF Council. BANGLADESH said that the GEF  definition of 'incremental costs' should include 'new and  additional funding' and costs for LDC's mitigation measures.  The PHILIPPINES, on behalf of the G-77 and China, inquired  about the status of the draft operational strategy, as  contained in FCCC/SBI/1995/3/Add.1, emphasizing that it  focused on mitigation, which was not a responsibility for  non-Annex I Parties. She proposed that the G-77 and China  amendments be appended to the annex of the MOU.

Bliss-Guest said that the operational strategy was still a  draft and that the GEF Secretariat was preparing a revised  strategy based on issues raised by Council members and  others. She was unable clarify the Brazilian proposal  because it was part of ongoing consultations between Brazil  and a GEF implementing agency. She said that the GEF  decision to fund or not to fund any project would be  reported to the COP and the COP could then consider the  matter. The PHILIPPINES, on behalf of the G-77 and China,  suggested that the draft operational strategy focus on  adaptation measures in light of Decision 11 of COP 1. PERU  highlighted the time lost in the reconsideration of projects  and proposed referring this to the GEF. The GEF said that  its membership exceeded the number of Parties to the FCCC  and that it was taking into consideration all views. The  Chair said all decisions in the GEF would conform with the  decisions of the COP. He said that each Convention had its  own objectives and that discussions on the MOUs of the FCCC  and the Convention on Biological Diversity would depend on  their respective COPs. With these comments, document  FCCC/SBI/1995/3/Add.1, on the arrangements between the COP  and the operating entity or entities and the financial  mechanism, and document FCCC/SBI/1995/3, on the Memorandum  of Understanding, were approved.

## ELABORATION AND SCHEDULING OF THE PROGRAMME OF WORK, 1996- 1997

The Secretariat introduced the proposed programme of work,  contained in document FCCC/SBI/1995/2, and a draft decision  on agenda  submitted by the Chair, contained in document  FCCC/SBI/1995/L.2. SPAIN, on behalf of the EU, said that the  bureaus of the two subsidiary bodies must work in close  coordination to avoid delays. He said that the SBI has an  important role to play in in-depth reviews and on initial  communications from non-Annex I Parties and should ensure  transparency. On the financial mechanisms, he mentioned that  COP I only agreed on initial guidance and the SBI needed to  compile information.  Regarding transfer of technology, he  said that the SBI should only focus on developing country  Parties and only the most promising technologies. As for  AIJ, he recalled that the COP should review these in the  pilot phase. Regarding possible contributions to the Berlin  Mandate process,  he said that work requested by the AGBM   should be considered a matter of priority.

JAPAN emphasized the importance of the issue of technology  transfer. He noted the work done by the Japan International  Cooperation Agency and other organizations on environmental  technology transfer. He suggested that it was useful to have  a database on 'on-going' activities related to transfer of  technology. MALAYSIA supported the creation of a report on  inventory of technologies referred to in the programme of  work and the SBI's work on AIJ. The REPUBLIC OF KOREA said  that technology transfer should be a standing item on the  SBI agenda. INDIA and CHINA said that technology transfer  was an important issue that was reflected in the  'irrefutable intent' of the FCCC. ZIMBABWE stressed the need  for appropriate technologies for developing countries and  the need for the SBI to consider the inputs of Southern NGOs  to the NGO workshop.

Document FCCC/SBI/1995/L.2, entitled 'Requests the  Secretariat to revise the scheduling of the programme of  work in light of the results of first session of SBSTA,' and  document FCCC/SBI/1995/2, Elaboration and scheduling of the  programme of work, were adopted with minor amendments.

A representative from the Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF),  on behalf of the Climate Action Network (CAN), said that  most Annex I countries have failed to develop and implement  adequate national programmes and that most existing  programmes are well behind schedule, but noted that the SBI  is the forum in which Parties can reflect on mid-course  corrections. She said that the SBI's short-term priorities  should include providing guidance for Annex I Parties'  second national communications and establishing appropriate  working relations with the GEF.

The Chair then asked whether the SBI preferred to meet the  following morning to approve an outline of the Report of the  meeting, or to authorize the Rapporteur, Mr. Jorge Benavides  de la Sotta (Peru) to incorporate the conclusions of the  meeting and allow SBSTA negotiations to continue. Following  assurances from the Chair that the report would contain  nothing that was not discussed, the SBI chose to have the  report completed and circulated. The Chair stated that the  report will be considered as adopted and noted that because  its elements have been adopted, there was no need to  formally adopt the report at this stage.

# A BRIEF ANALYSIS OF THE FIRST MEETING OF THE SUBSIDIARY  BODIES

COP 1 characterized the role of the SBSTA as the link  between scientific and technical assessments, information  provided by competent international bodies and the policy- oriented needs of the COP. COP 1 also characterized the role  of the SBI as developing recommendations to assist the COP  in the review and assessment of the implementation of the  Convention and in the preparation of the COP's decisions.  The first session of the SBSTA (SBSTA 1), following a week- long meeting on the Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate,  presented delegates with a weighty programme of work,  including several issues that were both technically  and  politically difficult to resolve, and only three days in  which to meet.  Those who hoped that SBSTA 1 could maintain  at least some of the momentum of past meetings might have  been discouraged by SBSTA's pace and output.  Delegates at  SBSTA confronted a daunting array of technically complex  issues. SBSTA was expected to develop recommendations on  many issues including: scientific assessments, national  communications from Annex I Parties, methodologies, first  communications from non-Annex I Parties, activities  implemented jointly, cooperation with competent  international bodies including the IPCC, technology transfer  and the workshop on NGO inputs. SBSTA 1 did not have the  time to consider all the issues originally slated for  consideration such as allocation and control of  international bunker fuels. Delegates were unable to avoid  the overlapping nature of issues and often found it  difficult to focus discussions on discrete agenda items. The  Chair's attempts to steer discussions towards procedural  rather than substantive issues did not meet with much  success.

In addition, SBSTA 1 had the difficult task of deciding on  the establishment of the TAPs. Even though delegates  referred to decision 6 of COP 1, calling for the  establishment of TAP-T and TAP-M, subject to confirmation by  COP 2, they were unable to reach consensus on essentials  such as the composition, terms of reference and office of  the TAPs. Plenary discussions revealed the divergence of  opinions between developed and developing countries on  almost all issues related to the establishment of the TAPs.  Despite many hours of informal consultations, and a final  evening Plenary originally allocated to SBI, there was no  eleventh-hour compromise. Many delegates were disappointed  that the TAPs were not established. However, until the US  and the G-77 are able to reach a compromise on the size and  composition of the TAPs, these panels may only remain a good  idea.

In comparison, the work of the SBI was conducted with  relative ease. Although originally allocated two days, the  SBI was able to work through its agenda in one day, largely  due to informal consultations that the Chair held in advance  of the meeting. Delegates discussed and adopted  recommendations on the elaboration of the programme of work,  matters related to the financial mechanism, including the  draft MOU between the COP and the GEF council, and  institutional and budgetary matters. The work of the SBI is  central to the success of the FCCC and future sessions might  prove to be difficult going.  In upcoming sessions, both  subsidiary bodies will be faced with the need to consider  specific proposals that challenge the political will of  Parties. Actions and decisions taken or avoided at AGBM 2  and SBSTA 2 will reflect not only the credibility of the  'Berlin Mandate' Process but also the FCCC.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR

### UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

The 50th session of the UN  General Assembly begins on 19 September 1995. When the   Second Committee addresses climate change, one of the issues  will be the COP's request for the General Assembly to 'pick  up the tab' for at least six weeks of meetings in 1996 and  four weeks of meetings in 1997.

### AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE

The second meeting of  the Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate will take place from  30 October to 3 November 1995 in Geneva. The AGBM will  consider the following Secretariat reports: a compilation of  submissions from Parties; the first edition of an annotated  compilation of information relevant to the Berlin Mandate  process; lists of issues identified by Parties; and a  synthesized listing of policies and measures identified in  Annex I Parties' national communications.

### SBI AND SBSTA

The next meeting of the two subsidiary  bodies is scheduled to take place from 26 February to 1  March 1996.