---
title: "A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE"
id: 1212000e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/1212000e
date: 
abstract: "  Increasing scientific evidence about the possibility of   global climate change in the 1980s led to a growing   awareness that human activities have been contributing to   substantial increases in the atmospheric concentrations of   greenhouse gases. Concerned that anthropogenic increases of   emissions enhance the natural greenhouse effect and would   result, on average, in an additional warming of the Earth's   surface, the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the   United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) established the   Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in 1988.   The Panel focused on: assessing scientific information   related to the various aspects of climate change; evaluating   the environmental and socio-economic impacts of climate   change; and formulating response strategies for the   management of global climate change. In 1990, the   finalization and adoption of the IPCC report and the Second   World Climate Conference focused further attention on   climate change."
---

# ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INC/FCCC

On 11 December 1990, the 45th session of the UN General   Assembly adopted a resolution that established the   Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee for a Framework   Convention on Climate Change (INC/FCCC). Supported by UNEP   and WMO, the mandate of the INC/FCCC was to prepare an   effective framework convention on climate change. The INC   held five sessions between February 1991 and May 1992.   During these meetings, participants from over 150 states   discussed the difficult and contentious issues of binding   commitments, targets and timetables for the reduction of   carbon dioxide emissions, financial mechanisms, technology   transfer, and 'common but differentiated' responsibilities   of developed and developing countries. The INC sought to   achieve a consensus that could be supported by a broad   majority, rather than drafting a treaty that dealt with   specific policies that might limit participation.

# ADOPTION AND ENTRY INTO FORCE

The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change   was adopted on 9 May 1992, and opened for signature at the   UN Conference on Environment and Development in June 1992 in   Rio, where it received 155 signatures. The Convention   entered into force on 21 March 1994 (90 days after receipt   of the 50th ratification).

  Since the adoption of the Convention, the INC has met five   more times to consider the following items: matters relating   to commitments; matters relating to arrangements for the   financial mechanism and for technical and financial support   to developing countries; procedural and legal matters; and   institutional matters. During these INC sessions, scientific   work was done to improve the methodologies for measuring   emissions from various sources, but the larger scientific   problem is choosing the best methodology to estimate the   removal of  carbon dioxide by 'sinks,' namely oceans and   forests. The other major task before negotiators has been to   work on the difficult issue of financial support for   implementation, particularly for developing country Parties   who will require 'new and additional resources' to obtain   data and implement energy-efficient technologies and other   necessary measures.

# INC-9

The INC held its ninth session from 7-18 February 1994, in   Geneva. In discussions on matters relating to commitments,   delegates examined methodologies for   calculations/inventories of emissions and removal of   greenhouse gases, the first review of information   communicated by Annex I Parties, the role of the subsidiary   bodies established by the Convention, and criteria for joint   implementation. Delegates also reviewed the adequacy of   commitments. The need for broader action beyond the year   2000 on the commitments in Article 4.2(a) and (b) was   considered, based on the understanding that the provisions   of this article refer to the present decade.

  In its discussions on matters relating to the financial   mechanism and technical and financial support to developing   country Parties, the Committee chose to focus on the   implementation of Article 11. It was agreed that only   developing countries that are Parties to the Convention   would be eligible to receive funding upon entry into force   of the Convention. There was general support for a cost-effective arrangement for the Permanent Secretariat that   would encourage collaboration with other secretariats. The   question of the location of the Permanent Secretariat was   not resolved, but it was agreed that the Permanent   Secretariat will start operating on 1 January 1996, and, in   the interest of continuity, will be organized along the same   lines as the Interim Secretariat.

# INC-10

The tenth session of the INC was held from 22 August - 2   September 1994, in Geneva. The Committee agreed on the   mechanisms for the first review of information communicated   by Annex I Parties. Some countries expressed the need for a   cautious approach to the review of adequacy of commitments,   since the scientific and technical assessments upon which   existing commitments are based were essentially unchanged.   Some countries also felt that the first meeting of the COP   would be a good occasion to make progress on the elaboration   of additional commitments. On the issue of joint   implementation, comments were invited on: objectives,   criteria and operational guidelines, functions and   institutional arrangements, and communication, review and   early experiences.

  On matters related to the financial mechanism, countries   agreed to a stage-by-stage funding modality for adaptation   measures. The temporary arrangements between the Committee   and the Global Environment Facility (GEF) were also adopted.   On agreed full incremental costs, the Committee concluded   that this issue was complex and that further discussions   were needed. Delegates also concluded that the concept   should be flexible and applied on a case-by-case basis. The   Interim Secretariat was requested to prepare a paper on   transfer of technology and delegations were invited to   submit their views on this issue. On the subject of the   Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice   (SBSTA) and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI),   the provisional recommendation to the COP is that the SBSTA   will be the link between the scientific and technical   assessments and the information provided by international   bodies and the policy-oriented needs of the COP. The SBI   will develop recommendations to assist the COP in its   assessment and review of the implementation of the   Convention.

  With regard to procedural and legal matters, the Committee   decided to continue its consideration of the draft Rules of   Procedure at its eleventh session. On institutional matters,   a contact group composed of five members of the Bureau, one   from each of the five regional groups, was established to   consider the various offers of governments and UN agencies   to host the Permanent Secretariat for the Convention and   make recommendations for the consideration of the Committee   at its eleventh session.

  Subsequent to INC-10, Trinidad and Tobago, on behalf of the   Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS), submitted a draft   protocol to the Interim Secretariat. This protocol, which   was distributed to other Parties, calls for a reduction of   emissions of greenhouse gases by 'at least 20% by the year   2005.'

# INC-11

The eleventh and final session of the INC met from 6-17   February 1995, at UN Headquarters in New York. During the   two-week session, delegates addressed a wide range of issues   including arrangements for the first session of the COP,   location of the Permanent Secretariat, Rules of Procedure   for the COP, matters relating to commitments, matters   relating to arrangements for the financial mechanism, and   provision of technical and financial support to developing   country Parties. While delegates did agree to maintain the   GEF as the interim entity operating the financial mechanism   and to finance mitigation activities, little concrete   progress was made on other important issues before the   Committee. Delegates were unable to take action on the   adequacy of commitments or to begin negotiations on a draft   protocol submitted by AOSIS or the proposals for further   elements of a protocol submitted by Germany. There was no   progress on joint implementation. Delegates had little time   to address technical and financial support to developing   countries. The location of the Permanent Secretariat remains   pending, although the four countries offering to host the   Secretariat (Canada, Germany, Switzerland and Uruguay) have   been asked to negotiate among themselves so that a single   nomination is presented to the COP in Berlin. Finally,   delegates were unable to reach agreement on the Rules of   Procedure, a problem that will haunt the Parties at COP-1,   who may find their substantive work hampered by the lack of   agreement on voting procedures and the allocation of seats   on the COP Bureau.

# CHALLENGES FOR COP-1

At a press conference on Monday, 27 March 1995, the   Executive-Secretary, Michael Zammit Cutajar, remarked that   not only was this the biggest UN event to be held in   Germany, but it was the biggest event for the Convention.   The 129 delegations who have registered so far, include 118   Parties to the Convention. One thousand NGO participants and   over 1000 media representatives are also expected. The   series of recommendations adopted at the conclusion of INC-11 and all remaining unresolved issues have been forwarded   to COP-1 for its consideration.

  The Convention requires COP-1 to address the following   issues:  First review of national communications: To date, 24 Annex I   Parties have submitted first national communications   describing their efforts at implementing the Convention. In   addition, the EC has sent an overview, Belgium has provided   a summary, and Liechtenstein (not an Annex I Party) has sent   in a national communication. Parties will assess this   information and will need to decide on the process for   future reviews.

  Adequacy of commitments: Parties will have to review the   'adequacy' of commitments under Article 4.2(a) and (b) of   the Convention, which requires Annex I Parties to take   measures aimed at returning their greenhouse gas emissions   to 1990 levels by the year 2000. COP-1 will consider and   take 'appropriate action' on the draft protocol submitted by   Trinidad and Tobago, on behalf of AOSIS, and the proposals   for further elements of a protocol submitted by Germany.

  Institutional arrangements: The Parties must consider   whether to extend or make permanent the interim arrangements   for the financial mechanism, currently operated by the GEF.   INC-11 recommended extending the interim arrangements.   Additionally, the designation and location of the Permanent   Secretariat and guidance for the work of the two subsidiary   bodies, the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) and the   Subsidiary Body for Science and Technological Advice   (SBSTA), will have to be decided. Bids to locate the   Permanent Secretariat have been made by Canada, Germany,   Switzerland and Uruguay.

  Rules of Procedure: COP-1 must adopt the Rules of Procedure.   Outstanding issues include the allocation of seats on the   Bureau and the voting procedures, specifically what kind of   voting majorities   two-thirds, three-fourths or consensus    will be needed to adopt substantive decisions, including   the adoption of protocols and matters relating to the   financial mechanism.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

## PLENARY

The Conference will open this morning at 10:00.   After the election of the President, German Federal Minister   for the Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety,   Angela Merkel, statements will be made by the following: the   President; Raul Estrada-Oyuela, the Chair of the INC/FCCC;   G.O.P. Obasi, the Secretary-General of WMO; Elizabeth   Dowdeswell, the Executive-Director of UNEP; Nitin Desai,   Under-Secretary-General of UN Department for Policy   Coordination and Sustainable Development (DPCSD); Klaus   Topfer, the Chair of the UN Commission on Sustainable   Development (CSD); Bert Bolin, the Chair of the IPCC; and   Michael Zammit Cutajar, the Executive-Secretary.

Delegates are then expected to consider organizational   matters, including adoption of the Rules of Procedure and   the Agenda, election of officers other than the President,   admission of organizations as observers, and organization of   work, including the establishment of a Committee of the   Whole (COW).

## COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE

The Committee of the Whole is   expected to convene this afternoon at 3:00. The COW is   expected to address Agenda Item 5, the report of the   INC/FCCC: outstanding issues allocated to the COW. The COW   will review these outstanding issues, decide on the   organization of work and, possibly, establish drafting   groups.

## PRESS CONFERENCE

The President of COP-1, Angela Merkel,   will hold a press conference at 1:30 pm in Room 3.