---
title: "HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE THIRD CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE UNITED NATIONS FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE 6 - 7 DECEMBER 1997"
id: enb1273e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1273e
date: 1997-12-07
abstract: "The Committee of the Whole (COW) of the Third Conference of  the Parties (COP-3) to the Framework Convention on Climate  Change (FCCC) met in afternoon and evening sessions on  Saturday. Delegates reviewed the revised text produced by  informal negotiating groups and discussed outstanding  issues. The Chair of the COW issued a non-paper  (FCCC/CP/1997/CRP.2) on Sunday that reflected the current  status of the negotiating text and set out the options for  high-level input."
---

# COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE

Delegates considered a revised text on institutions and  mechanisms. The document contains the Preamble, which  addresses the ultimate objective of the Convention, Article  3 of the Convention and the Berlin Mandate. The proposed  Preamble does not specifically mention Article 4.2(a) and  (b). The G-77/CHINA said there is no agreement.

Takao Shibata (Japan) reported that his negotiating group  had agreement on Articles 8 (submissions by Parties), 9  (review of submissions), 15 (secretariat), 16 (subsidiary  bodies), 17 (multilateral consultative process), 19  (application), 21 (annexes), 22 (voting), 23 (depository),  24 (signature), 25 (reservations), 26 (entry into force),  and 28-29 (original texts), including alternatives and  reservations.

Article 14(i) contained two alternatives on the rules of  procedure and the financial rules. The US supported  Alternative B, under which the MOP would adopt rules of  procedure and financial rules by consensus. The G-77/CHINA  said that during informal consultations, it had combined  its proposal with the EU's and produced Alternative A,  under which the rules of the Convention apply to the  protocol mutatis mutandis except as may otherwise be  decided by consensus by the COP. Following a proposal by  the Chair, delegates adopted Alternative A.

Article 18 contains two alternatives on procedures and  mechanisms related to non-compliance. Alternative A would  apply to Annex I Parties and penalties would operate  through a clean development fund. Alternative B would apply  to all Parties and any procedures adopted that entail  binding consequences shall be adopted by amending the  protocol. The Chair proposed continuing informal  consultations. The US proposed new text that would, inter  alia, require Parties exceeding their emissions budget for  a given period to reduce the excess amount from subsequent  periods.

Article 26 contains two alternatives on entry into force.  Alternative A uses triggers related to number of  ratifications and a percentage of CO2 emissions.  Alternative B would require [75] or [50] ratifications and  [50%] or [75%] of Annex I Parties.

Chair Estrada proposed specifying 50 Parties and 60% of  total emissions. Chair Shibata reported that most Parties  preferred Alternative A, but suggested requiring 75% of  emissions. The Chair suggested a footnote stating that this  percentage gives veto power for entry into force to one  particular Party. The G-77/CHINA said any figure in excess  of 50% is unacceptable. He could support Article B if it  required 50 ratifications and 60% of Annex I Parties.

Luis Gylvan Meira Filho (Brazil) introduced a revised draft  text relating to multi-year targets. The text provides an  additional definition to be added to Article 1, stating  that a 'defined amount' means the amount of net aggregate  emissions a Party may not exceed in a given commitment  period in order to meet its QELROs. The revised text also  contains three alternatives for the first paragraph of  Article 3 (commitments).

The G-77/CHINA objected to the definition of 'defined  amount' and supported Alternative C, which calls for QELROs  within time frames such as 2005, 2010 and 2020. He proposed  references requiring a Party to implement its commitments  to achieve QELROs, rather than have its 'defined amounts'  of emissions be equal to the percentage assigned to it in  Attachment I.

The US said this had been agreed in the negotiating group.  The Chair proposed using the original text pending  consultations. CHINA objected to the omission of crucial  elements of targets and timetables. Informal consultations  will continue.

On Article 2 on policies and measures (P&Ms), Chair Mahmoud  Ould El Ghaouth requested more time for consultations. The  Article remains bracketed. There was no progress on Article  10 on voluntary commitments, which remains bracketed.

NORWAY summarized the draft on Article 4, the EU 'bubble.'  He noted an impasse on two alternatives, one from the EU  and one from other contact group members. The second  alternative emphasizes that allocation of emissions under  the 'bubble' would be legally binding. Another section  would cap rearrangements of allocations, and text is  included to take account of changes in or enlargement of  regional economic integration organizations.

IRAN reported on negotiations on minimizing the adverse  effects of climate change through policies and measures. He  proposed alternative text based on a draft decision by  Zimbabwe and Uganda calling for an SBI review of actions to  meet developing country needs-related adverse effects. Both  contain a bracketed reference to [establishment of  measurements of compensation]. The US, the EU, POLAND,  AUSTRALIA, and CANADA said compensation was unacceptable  and the paragraph should be deleted. SAUDI ARABIA, the G-77/CHINA, INDONESIA, UGANDA, URUGUAY, KUWAIT, NIGERIA, the  UNITED ARAB EMIRATES, CHINA, VENEZUELA, BAHRAIN and EGYPT  supported removing the brackets. ZIMBABWE suggested  ministerial consideration of the proposal under FCCC  Article 4.8. NEW ZEALAND objected to compensation, but  supported Uganda's proposal to replace 'compensation' with  'impacts.' The Chair suggested replacing the existing  paragraph with Iran's text, with the entire text bracketed.

Bo Kjellén (Sweden), Chair of the working group on Article  12, reported that numerous alternative texts remained to be  decided. A document was distributed outlining the status of  negotiation, including alternative texts and some new  proposals. Chair Estrada invited Parties to negotiate on  the basis of Kjellén's alternatives. The US introduced a  new proposal on the transfer of environmentally sound  technologies (ESTs).

John Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda), Chair of the working group  on Article 13 on finance reported disagreement over  bracketed references to provision of financial resources  'through the financial mechanism' defined by Article 11 and  over guidance to the mechanism. The PHILIPPINES, for the G-77/CHINA, proposed deletion of the text in brackets. The  UK, for the EU, and supported by the US, CANADA and JAPAN,  said it was necessary to specify the financial mechanism to  avoid any ambiguity. Chair Estrada, supported by NIGERIA,  suggested deletion.

On a paragraph concerning guidance to the COP on the  financial mechanism from the Meeting of the Parties to the  protocol, he reported the G-77/CHINA's view that the  paragraph does not legally belong in the Protocol. Chair  Estrada suggested deleting the paragraph. The PHILIPPINES,  for the G-77/CHINA, said there should not be two sets of  guidelines to the financial mechanism. CHINA rejected any  attempt to rewrite FCCC Article 4.1. The US and the UK  asked for more time.

Chair Ashe introduced a revised draft text for Article 13.  The first paragraph indicates that the implementation of  Article 12 shall take into account FCCC provisions on  financial resources and the vulnerability of developing  countries to climate change. The second paragraph states  that developed country Parties to the Convention, 'in  accordance with Articles 4.3 and 11 of the Convention'  shall provide financial resources to meet agreed full costs  incurred by developing country Parties in formulating  national communications, and to meet the agreed full  incremental costs of implementing measures such as national  communications, inventories of GHGs, collection of data and  adaptation of new technologies. A third paragraph states  that previous decisions by the COP on the financial  mechanism, shall apply mutatis mutandis to this article. A  fourth paragraph indicates that developing country Parties  can avail themselves of financial resources for the  implementation of Article 12, through bilateral, regional  or other multilateral channels. The PHILIPPINES, supported  by SAUDI ARABIA, CHINA and PERU requested more time for the  G-77/China to consult on the text because of the links  between this paragraph and other outstanding issues,  particularly those referring to the advancement of  commitments under Article 4.1.

Chair Estrada reported that no agreement had been reached  on alternative text for articles on emissions trading and  joint implementation (Articles 6 and 7 respectively), so  they would remain as they appeared in the negotiating  document produced by AGBM-8 (FCCC/CP/1997/2).

CANADA introduced text containing seven paragraphs. In the  first paragraph, language stating that commitments under  Article 3 will be met by Annex I Parties in a 'cost  effective manner' and 'in accordance with international  rules' was introduced. A paragraph setting a cap on the  emissions trading regime was introduced. A paragraph states  that reporting on emissions trading should be conducted  annually and there are three alternative paragraphs on  guidelines for the structure and timing of an emissions  trading mechanism.

INDIA, on behalf of the G-77/CHINA and supported by CHINA  and INDONESIA, reiterated its objection to the concept of  emissions trading, stating that it is extraneous to the  Berlin Mandate and would not lead to GHG emissions  limitation and reduction.

On sinks, Chair Estrada asked for informal consultations to  consider several questions including, inter alia, a  proposal that a subsidiary body could work on sinks in June  1998, and report to COP-4 prior to entry into force of the  protocol. The RUSSIAN FEDERATION said the nature of the  issue's resolution would determine his view of the  protocol. The MARSHALL ISLANDS, COSTA RICA and URUGUAY said  they were ready to adopt the existing draft text. CANADA  said there is an inconsistency in the proposal's treatment  of harvesting, which would cause Canada 'enormous pain,'  and reforestation, which would not offset the penalty from  harvesting. MEXICO asked the Chair to include conservation  activities in the consideration of a definition of sinks.  Chair Estrada said that the necessary analysis and  definitions were not yet available. The US said the text  might not be resolved until calculations regarding targets  had been completed. Chair Estrada said his suggested  definitions would point to lower numbers. It was best to be  clear and transparent on what Parties were planning to do  and adopt common standards. The EU urged caution to avoid  perverse incentives.

Antonio La Viña (Philippines) introduced a revised non- paper on sinks, containing only text relating to Option C  of previous non-papers (accounting for limited sink  activities to offset emissions). JAPAN, BARBADOS, RUSSIA,  the US, CANADA, CUBA and JAMAICA supported the text. NEW  ZEALAND, supported by AUSTRALIA, the US and NORWAY, called  for an earlier text to be kept as an option for ministers.  The Chair noted that the text had not been formally  introduced, but agreed to keep it as a source. The MARSHALL  ISLANDS, SWITZERLAND, BARBADOS and MALAYSIA objected. The  US proposed adding 'for the first commitment period' to a  paragraph on when sink activities would be allowed. The EU  put the whole paragraph in brackets. SAMOA, with TUVALU,  signaled a possible reservation on the paragraph if other  texts are left as options.

The latest text on 7 December, which is all bracketed,  incorporates sinks into Article 3, calling on Annex I  Parties to achieve QELROs for sources and sinks within  suggested time frames as one alternative. It also states  that the net changes in GHG emissions from sources and  removals by sinks resulting from direct human-induced land- use change and forestry activities, limited to  afforestation, reforestation, and deforestation since 1990,  measured as verifiable changes in stocks in each commitment  period, shall be used to meet Parties' commitments in  Article 3. It also calls for Parties to provide data for  SBSTA to establish their levels of carbon stocks in 1990  and enable an estimate of changes in subsequent years. The  MOP shall review and determine modalities, rules and  guidelines as to how and which additional human-induced  activities shall be added to or subtracted from the defined  amount for Annex I Parties at its first meeting or as soon  as practicable.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### COP

Plenary will convene at 10:00 am in the Main Hall.