---
title: "THE SECOND CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE UN FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE: 8-19 JULY 1996"
id: 1228000e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/1228000e
date: 1996-07-19
abstract: "The Second Conference of the Parties (COP-2) to the  Framework Convention on Climate Change begins today in  Geneva. The COP's four subsidiary bodies are also expected  to hold sessions throughout the two week session. The  Ministerial Segment to COP-2 will be held 17-18 July."
---

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE CONVENTION

Increasing scientific evidence in the 1980s about the  possibility of global climate change led to a growing  consensus that human activities have been contributing to  substantial increases in the atmospheric concentrations of  greenhouse gases. In response, on 11 December 1990, the 45th  session of the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution that  established the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee for  a Framework Convention on Climate Change (INC/FCCC).  Supported by UNEP and WMO, the mandate of the INC/FCCC was  to prepare an effective framework convention on climate  change. The INC held five sessions between February 1991 and  May 1992. The UN Framework Convention on Climate Change was  adopted on 9 May 1992, and was opened for signature at the  UN Conference on Environment and Development in June 1992 in  Rio de Janeiro, where it received 155 signatures. The  Convention entered into force on 21 March 1994, 90 days  after receipt of the 50th ratification, and has been  ratified by almost 160 countries.

The first meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the UN  Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP-1) took place in  Berlin from 28 March - 7 April 1995. Delegates came to  agreement on what many believed to be the central issue  before COP-1 - adequacy of commitments. The result was a  mandate to launch a process toward appropriate action for  the period beyond the year 2000, including the strengthening  of the commitments of developed countries. Delegates also  reached agreement on a number of other important issues,  including the establishment of a pilot phase for  implementation of joint projects, the location of  the  Permanent Secretariat in Bonn, Germany, the budget for the  Secretariat, financial procedures and the establishment of  the subsidiary bodies. Delegates, however, did not reach  consensus on the rules of procedure. This critical issue,  including a decision on the voting rules and the composition  of the Bureau, was deferred until COP-2.

# HIGHLIGHTS SINCE COP-1

## AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE

COP-1 established an open-ended Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin  Mandate (AGBM) through decision FCCC/CP/1995/7/Add.1/  Decision 1/CP.1. In this decision, known as the 'Berlin  Mandate', the COP agreed to begin a process to strengthen  the commitments on the part of industrialized countries to  reduce greenhouse gas emissions beyond the year 2000 through  the adoption of a protocol or other legal instrument.

At its first session (AGBM-1), held in Geneva from 21-25  August 1995, delegates considered several issues, including  an analysis and assessment to identify possible policies and  measures for Annex I Parties and requests for inputs to  subsequent sessions. They debated the nature, content and  duration of the analysis and assessment and its relationship  to other aspects of the process. Several developed and  developing countries stressed that analysis and assessment  should be conducted in parallel and not prior to the  negotiations, but a few developing countries held that more  time was needed, particularly to evaluate economic costs.  (See Earth Negotiations Bulletin Vol. 12 No. 22.). At AGBM- 2, held in Geneva from 30 October - 3 November 1995, debate  over the extent of analysis and assessment continued, but  delegates also heard new ideas for the structure and form of  a possible protocol. Delegates considered: strengthening of  commitments in Article 4.2 (a) and (b) regarding policies  and measures, as well as quantified emission limitation and  reduction objectives within specified time-frames; advancing  the implementation of Article 4.1; and possible features of  a protocol or other legal instrument. (See Earth  Negotiations Bulletin Vol. 12 No. 24.).

At AGBM-3, held in Geneva from 5-8 March 1996, delegates  heard a number of new, specific proposals on new commitments  for Annex I Parties, including a two-phase CO2 emissions  reduction target proposed by Germany. They also discussed  how Annex I countries might distribute or share new  commitments, and whether those should take the form of an  amendment or protocol. Developing countries raised questions  on whether policies and measures under discussion would  represent barriers to trade. Delegates agreed to compile  proposals for new commitments for consideration at AGBM-4,  and to hold informal roundtable discussions on policies and  measures as well as on quantitative emissions limitation and  reduction objectives.

## SUBSIDIARY BODY ON SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL ADVICE (SBSTA)

The SBSTA was established by COP-1 to link scientific,  technical and technological assessments, information  provided by competent international bodies, and the policy- oriented needs of the COP. The first meeting of the SBSTA  (SBSTA-1) was held in Geneva from 28-30 August 1995.  Delegates confronted technically and politically complex  issues, including: scientific assessments, national  communications from Annex I Parties, methodologies, first  communications from non-Annex I Parties, and activities  implemented jointly under the pilot phase. The SBSTA also  was to establish intergovernmental technical advisory panels  on technologies (TAP-T) and methodologies (TAP-M), however,  it did not have time to consider all of these issues. Among  the more contentious issues were: definition of the SBSTA's  relationship with the IPCC, the terms of reference and  composition of the TAPs and the elaboration of guidelines  for national communications from non-Annex I Parties.  Delegates successfully identified areas for cooperation with  the IPCC, agreed on a division of labor with the SBI on  technology transfer issues, and requested the Secretariat to  organize a workshop on non-governmental inputs. However, no  progress was made on the formation of the TAPs and delegates  had to resume this discussion at SBSTA-2.

SBSTA-2, held in Geneva from 27 February through 4 March  1996, considered scientific assessment and cooperation,  including the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's  (IPCC) Second Assessment Report (SAR), reporting by Annex I  and non-Annex I Parties, activities implemented jointly  (AIJ) and the Technical Advisory Panels (TAPs). The main  result was that Parties documented that they could not yet  agree on how to absorb or respond to scientific predictions  of climate change. Although initial discussions gave the  impression that SBSTA-2 would greet the IPCC's predictions  with less resistance than in previous FCCC negotiations, oil  producers and other developing countries ultimately blocked  consensus on specific conclusions about the IPCC Second  Assessment Report. Weekend negotiations resulted in a  fragile agreement on language defining the divergence of  opinion. Three paragraphs in the SBSTA's report list points  of contention, alternately highlighting the urgency and  uncertainty in the IPCC report of a 'discernible human  influence' on climate change. One line of the SBSTA's  conclusions tells the story on TAPs: at this stage SBSTA  could not agree on modalities.

## SUBSIDIARY BODY ON IMPLEMENTATION (SBI)

The first meeting of the SBI (SBI-1) took place from 31  August - 1 September 1995 in Geneva. The SBI addressed:  communications from Annex I Parties; a progress report on  in-depth review; institutional and budgetary matters;  matters relating to the financial mechanism; and the  elaboration and scheduling of the programme of work for  1996-1997. Delegates rapidly adopted the SBI's work  programme and recommended that the COP adopt the draft  Memorandum of Understanding with the GEF as the financial  mechanism, and proposed a draft decision on this item to be  adopted by COP-2.

At SBI-2, held in Geneva from 27 February through 4 March  1996, delegates considered in-depth reviews of national  communications, matters related to the financial mechanism,  financial and technical cooperation, transfer of technology,  arrangements for the relocation of the Secretariat to Bonn  and COP-2. SBI-2 delegates could claim some measurable  progress, yet comments on the floor frequently highlighted  what had not been done to implement the Convention. While  delegates welcomed the GEF Council's adoption of its  operational strategy, many noted the need to expedite the  process of providing 'full agreed costs' for non-Annex I  communications or risk serious delays. Developing countries  frequently noted that providing funds to the GEF and  providing funds to countries were not the same thing. The  SBI's review of in-depth reports revealed that many  delegations found the national communications in need of  comparability and consistency. The problem of membership  distribution provoked several lengthy debates on the  composition of the Bureau, a question pending since COP-1.  Despite numerous consultations the issue remains  outstanding.

## AD HOC GROUP ON ARTICLE 13

At its first session, the Ad Hoc Group on Article 13 decided  to request Parties, non-parties, and intergovernmental and  non-governmental organizations to make written submissions  in response to a questionnaire on a multilateral  consultative process (FCCC/AG13/1995/2, para. 17). Nineteen  Parties, one non-party and ten NGOs submitted responses,  which were compiled in documents FCCC/AG13/1996/MISC.1 and  MISC.2. The documents provide a spectrum of views on the  multilateral consultative process and identify common areas  of understanding.

## RELATED PROCEEDINGS

### REGIONAL CONFERENCE ON JOINT IMPLEMENTATION IN COUNTRIES IN  TRANSITION

This conference, held 17-19 April 1996 in  Prague, brought together more than 100 officials from  government agencies of Annex I Countries, international  organizations and representatives from science, industry and  NGOs. The participants discussed the positions of Annex I  countries on joint implementation, experiences gained at the  project level, new proposals for projects, and the  calculation of baseline and mitigation costs (including the  costs of carbon sequestration). For more information contact  Dr. Milos Tichy, SEVEn, T: +42 2 24247552, F: +42 2  24247552, e-mail: milos.tichy@ecn.cnz. Internet at  http://www.ji.org.

### WORKSHOP ON JOINT IMPLEMENTATION IN NORTH AMERICA

The  Commission for Environmental Cooperation (CEC) sponsored the  first North American workshop on Joint Implementation on 17  April 1996 in Mexico City. Participants shared information  about national efforts, potential projects, and investment  and financing opportunities for regional implementation. A  series of four project case studies was presented and  comment was provided by a number of leading experts. For  information contact: Lynn M. Fischer, Climate Change Program  Manager, CEC, 393 rue St. Jacques Ouest, Bureau 200,  Montreal, Quebec H2X 2Y6, Canada, T: +1 514 350-4300, F:+1  514 350-4314, e-mail: lfischer@ccemtl.org or  fischerl@msn.com.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### PLENARY

COP-1 President Dr. Angela Merkel (Germany) is  expected to open the Conference this morning in the General  Assembly Hall. Delegates are expected to elect the President  of COP-2, President-Designate H.E. Chen Chimutengwende  (Zimbabwe), and to hear statements from UNFCCC Executive  Secretary Michael Zammit Cutajar, Nitin Desai (DPCSD),  Elizabeth Dowdeswell (UNEP), Bert Bolin (IPCC), as well as  representatives from WMO, GEF, CSD, IAA, IEA and the Swiss  Government. Delegates are expected to address organizational  matters.