---
title: "HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE THIRD CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE UNITED NATIONS FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE, 4 DECEMBER 1997"
id: enb1271e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1271e
date: 1997-12-04
abstract: "Delegates to the Third Conference of the Parties (COP-3) to  the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC) met in  negotiating groups in the morning and afternoon. The groups  continued their discussions on quantified emission  limitation and reduction objectives (QELROs), sinks,  policies and measures (P&Ms), advancing the implementation  of Article 4.1 (commitments) and institutions and  mechanisms. The Committee of the Whole (COW) met in an  evening 'stock-taking' Plenary session."
---

# COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE

Chair Raúl Estrada Oyuela (Argentina) indicated that  considerable progress had been made on some elements of  QELROs, while the more difficult ones remain to be solved  during the high-level segment. He reported agreement on  text for Articles 3.3 and 3.4 on commitments for countries  with economies in transition and for Article 11 on periodic  review of the implementation of the Protocol. He informed  delegates that a paragraph on emissions borrowing (Article  3.14) was eliminated, and that a draft decision on  methodologies for estimation of GHGs is to be recommended  for adoption by the COP. On outstanding issues, he  indicated that informal consultations had served to  identify options on coverage of gases and on baskets. He  said that an option listing gases separately was still  open, and added that he would prepare a text on coverage of  gases based on the discussions.

Luis Gylvan Meira Filho (Brazil) reported on the informal  consultations he had conducted on 'multi-year targets,'  formerly known as 'budgets.' He stated that problems during  the discussion arose from the meaning of the word 'budget.'  Some delegations indicated confusion between the terms  'emission budgets' and 'budget periods.'  To solve the  problem, these were replaced with 'total emissions' and  'commitment periods' respectively. He indicated that a text  on QELROs reflecting these changes was available. He said  there was increasing agreement that the range for  'commitment periods' should be five years. Chair Estrada  added that using the term 'multi-year targets' had no  implications for Parties' obligation to submit national  communications on an annual basis. The US, supported by NEW  ZEALAND, said that the term 'total emissions' does not  fully encompass the meaning of the word 'budget,' and noted  the need to further reflect on the meaning of the term  where it appeared in other parts of the text.

The Chair of the negotiating group on the proposed  compensation fund (Iran) reported that there were still  divergent views on the issue and that further consultations  were needed.

Harald Dovaland (Norway) reported on informal consultations  conducted on the European 'bubble' contained in Article 4  and said that further clarifications were needed on the  meaning of terms within the article. He said that the EU  was trying to find ways to accommodate delegations'  concerns. Chair Estrada urged the group to continue its  consultations in order to report on progress to the COP as  soon as possible. The EU stated that it would not be in a  position to continue consultations until the Ministers  arrived, given the significance of the issue for the EU.  Chair Estrada ruled that he would not wait for the high- level segment and would proceed to submit existing  proposals for decision by the COP. The Russian Federation  supported the Chair's ruling.

Dámaso Luna (México), reported that further consultations  were needed on voluntary commitments for non-Annex I  Parties (Article 10).

Luiz Gylvan Meira Filho (Brazil) reported on consultations  held on a proposed clean development fund (Article 18) and  said that there was verbal consensus to include it in the  text of the Protocol, but drafting to that effect was  pending.

The Chair of the negotiating group on sinks, Antonio La  Viña (Philippines) said that full agreement had not been  possible and introduced a draft document containing three  bracketed paragraphs. The first paragraph states that Annex  I Parties shall ensure that their [gross] aggregate  anthropogenic carbon dioxide equivalent emissions do not  exceed their commitments. The second bracketed paragraph  discusses net [changes in] GHG emissions from sources and  removals by sinks resulting from direct human induced land- use change and forestry activities. It lists three options.  Options A refers to variable changes in stocks. Option B  refers to verifiable changes in stocks [up to xx per cent]  of the QELROs. Option C is limited to afforestation,  reforestation, deforestation, and harvesting since 1990  measured as verifiable changes in stocks used to meet  QELROs. A third paragraph states that the MOP shall  determine how and which human induced activities related to  GHG emissions and removals in the land-use change and  forestry activities category shall contribute to meeting  QELROs commitments.

Chair Estrada observed that other issues are pending  decision on QELROs and that definitions were needed. He  said that not everyone would be happy but it is time to  decide. AUSTRALIA proposed a new option for a fully  comprehensive approach. She advocated a net approach and  suggested that the other options would introduce inequities  between countries, along with uncertainty. The new  Australian text, with support from the RUSSIAN FEDERATION,  provides for Annex I Parties to ensure that their net  anthropogenic carbon dioxide equivalent emissions as listed  in Annex A do not exceed their commitments in terms of  emission budgets/target year, inscribed in Attachment I. It  further states that the verifiable net GHG emissions from  sources and removals by sinks in terms of carbon dioxide  equivalents resulting from direct human-induced activities  shall be used to meet the QELROs commitments of each Party  in Annex I, and provides for reporting in a transparent and  verifiable manner.

NEW ZEALAND described Option C as very limited and noted  his support for including all verifiable categories. JAPAN  said his basic approach continues to be the gross approach.  He recalled that the IPCC Chair Emeritus, Bert Bolin, had  raised problems concerning sinks. If Parties deny  uncertainties, their entire effort to work out appropriate  targets would lose its justification. He supported Option  C. CANADA said Option C does not cover conservation of  currently managed forests or agrarian practices and  provides no incentive for biodiversity. BARBADOS supported  Option C. The US said his own preference would be similar  to the Australian proposal. He said Option C was limited,  and 'forest management and forest conservation' should be  added. The UK commented on the complex mathematical issues  raised by choosing either a gross or net approach and their  implications. He suggested that it was going to be  extremely problematic to negotiate the question, and the  issue may have to be resolved politically.

The MARSHALL ISLANDS, supported by GRENADA, cautioned  against the uncertainties connected with measuring other  activities and preferred putting them in Paragraph 3.  CANADA and NORWAY noted their preference for Option A,  saying the uncertainties are overdrawn. BRAZIL, supported  by COSTA RICA, favored Option C as in the original Chair's  text, or dropping the whole Article. ICELAND, URUGUAY,  CANADA, MEXICO, COSTA RICA and NEW ZEALAND supported the  US's concern that Option C refers to only a limited number  of activities that can contribute to sinks. URUGUAY  proposed adding 'forest management, reforestation and any  other forestry activity.' MEXICO suggested 'forest  management and forest conservation' and COSTA RICA proposed  'natural forest regeneration,' and cautioned against  allowing sink activities to disappear during the review  discussed in Paragraph 3. ICELAND called for giving Parties  credit for the changes occurring during a target year or  budget period. NORWAY, supported by NEW ZEALAND,  added  brackets around 'since 1990' in Option C, as in Options A  and B. GRENADA queried how to measure 1990 sinks now if not  already done and suggested giving a negative credit to  countries when sinks are destroyed. ARGENTINA supported  Option C, noting its relationship to forest conservation,  the Convention to Combat Desertification and recovery of  soils.

The Chair suggested that Option C appeared ready for  consensus, evoking neither passionate support nor strong  opposition. It is clearly a text to limit or set parameters  to sinks. He said delegates would have to take US comments  and their support into account, although definitions  related to 'forest management' could be a task for SBSTA.  There was clear resistance to this option, but he felt the  COW was ready to accept Option C, adding 'forest management  and forest conservation.' AUSTRALIA said she could accept the amended Option C, but  that this depended on inclusion of a 'net' approach and  removal of an exclusion of land-use change and forestry in  the article's first paragraph. VENEZUELA said the US  amendments would reduce its reluctance regarding Option C.  URUGUAY said the US amendments sought sustainable  development. CANADA supported the modified Option C, as did  HONDURAS, who supported Iceland on including soil  productivity. BRAZIL and SAMOA expressed strong  disagreement, SAMOA preferring to bracket 'deforestation or  harvesting.' JAPAN supported the original Option C, but not  with the US amendments, which tremendously increased  ambiguities and uncertainties.

The Chair noted clear reaction against 'forest management  and forest conservation.' He asked whether the US could  support only 'management.' The US said the choice on sinks  will have an enormous impact on a number. He said it was  also necessary to ensure the numbers for sinks were  transparent and verifiable.

The MARSHALL ISLANDS said he was not prepared to let Annex  I Parties take credit for what nature is doing. He said he  could not accept Option C without further consultations.  The EU said the paragraph should remain bracketed for  ministers. BARBADOS did not support Option C. PERU  supported Option C but expressed doubts regarding  methodology for forest management. GRENADA did not  understand how conservation of forests improves the uptake  of a sink. Management would maintain the sink but not  increase its effectiveness.

NORWAY said limiting a comprehensive use of sinks limits a  comprehensive policy approach and creates uncertainties to  countries willing to undertake ambitious commitments. He  called for inclusion of forest management and supported  Iceland's call to include other land use sinks. BRAZIL said  the question is: what are man-made activities for which  credits should be given to increase emissions? He compared  the 6 gigatonnes (Gt) of carbon emitted from fossil fuel  and 1 Gt from land use change to natural uptake of 2 Gt by  oceans and 2 Gt on continental surfaces. Given deep  economic limitations and the inclusion of all countries, if  all forests are considered managed this would grant a  license for 30 percent more emissions. Because the FCCC  includes an obligation to conserve and maintain sinks and  reservoirs, he suggested a separate article to restate the  obligation for all Parties to sustainably manage their  sinks.

# NEGOTIATING GROUPS

The negotiating group on policies and measures discussed a  revised draft text prepared by Chair Mohamed Ould El  Ghaouth (Mauritania). There has been some agreement on the  kind of policies and measures to be considered and on their  inclusion in the protocol. There are differences over  whether policies and measures should apply to non-Annex I  countries and whether their application should be adjusted  according to national circumstances. A related discussion  concerns the issue of 'comparability.' The options for  coordination were also discussed.

A contact group on institutions and mechanisms, chaired by  Patrick Szell (UK), reported progress on a number of  Articles including those dealing with national  communications, non-compliance, the Meeting/Conference of  the Parties and amendments.

A participant in the negotiating group on Article 4.1  reported 'slow but steady' progress. He said a revised text  has been prepared, but delegates will continue their  discussions Friday morning.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

A number of the key elements in a final agreement are the  subject of bilateral and multilateral contacts on the  fringes of the negotiation. One important example is the  bilateral contact between the US and Brazil to discuss the  fate of the proposed clean development fund. Observers  believe that the US has come to view the initiative as the  key to a neat fix, linking a number of their interests,  including emissions trading, and engaging some developing  countries in meaningful participation with the promise of  generating funds for technology. Asked about the US  interest in the clean development fund, an EU  representative warned that multiple loopholes would render  targets meaningless.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### COW

The COW is expected to meet in Plenary at 10:00 am to  continue discussing sinks and other issues.

### PLENARY

The COP is expected to meet in Plenary at 3:00pm.