---
title: "SUMMARY OF THE THIRTEENTH SESSIONS OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES OF THE UN FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE, 4-15 SEPTEMBER 2000"
id: enb12151e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12151e
date: 2000-09-15
abstract: "The first part of the thirteenth sessions of the subsidiary  bodies (SB-13) of the United Nations Framework Convention  on Climate Change (FCCC) was held from 11-15 September  2000, at the Palais des Congrès in Lyon, France, preceded  by one week of informal meetings from 4-9 September. With  over 2000 participants representing 159 Parties, one  observer State, 169 observer organizations and the media,  delegates to SB-13 and the informal meetings continued work  aimed at fulfilling the Buenos Aires Plan of Action (BAPA)  adopted at the Fourth Conference of the Parties (COP-4) in  November 1998. Under the BAPA, Parties set a two-year  deadline to strengthen FCCC implementation and prepare for  the future entry into force of the Kyoto Protocol. The  upcoming Sixth Conference of the Parties (COP-6), scheduled  to take place from 13-24 November 2000, in The Hague, the  Netherlands, will mark the culmination of this two-year  process. The first part of SB-13 closed when the meeting  was suspended on 15 September. SB-13 will resume in The  Hague in November."
---

During the informal meetings and the first part of SB-13,  delegates discussed text for decisions covering a range of  technical and political issues, with the aim of preparing  for a comprehensive agreement at COP-6. Delegates adopted  draft conclusions on various issues, including the  mechanisms, compliance, policies and measures (P&Ms),  capacity building, technology transfer, land use, land-use  change and forestry (LULUCF), Article 4.8 and 4.9 of the  FCCC and Article 3.14 of the Kyoto Protocol (adverse  effects), and guidelines under Articles 5 (methodological  issues), 7 (communication of information) and 8 (review of  information) of the Protocol. When SB-13 resumes in  November, delegates will continue consideration of a number  of issues, including national communications and  implementation of the Headquarters Agreement.

At the end of two weeks of intense deliberations, delegates  and observers may have good cause to feel concerned.  Political positions on the key issues remain entrenched,  with little indication of willingness to compromise or move  forward. Some might argue that this was never the meeting's  aim, suggesting that its core purpose was to develop  negotiating text and narrow differences on technical  matters. But even on this more limited objective, progress  was patchy. While such text emerged on the key elements of  the BAPA - mechanisms, compliance, adverse effects,  technology transfer, LULUCF and policies and measures - all  of these documents remain riddled with brackets. In some  cases, negotiations almost ground to a halt, indicating an  apparent unwillingness of Parties to make even relatively  minor concessions. With only eight weeks remaining, and  with many technical and political questions yet to be  resolved, observers are beginning to question whether COP-6  will succeed.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FCCC AND THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

The FCCC was adopted on 9 May 1992, and opened for  signature at the UN Conference on Environment and  Development in June 1992. It entered into force on 21 March  1994, 90 days after receipt of the 50th ratification. It  has currently received 184 instruments of ratification,  acceptance, approval or accession.

### COP-1

The first Conference of the Parties to the FCCC  (COP-1) took place in Berlin from 28 March - 7 April 1995.  In addition to addressing a number of important issues  related to the future of the FCCC, delegates reached  agreement on the adequacy of commitments and adopted the  'Berlin Mandate.' Delegates agreed to establish an open- ended Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate (AGBM) to begin a  process toward appropriate action for the period beyond  2000, including the strengthening of commitments of Annex I  Parties (developed country Parties and Parties with  economies in transition) through the adoption of a protocol  or other legal instrument. COP-1 also requested the  Secretariat to make arrangements for sessions of the  Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advise  (SBSTA) and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI).  SBSTA serves as the link between the information provided  by competent international bodies, and the policy-oriented  needs of the COP. SBI was created to develop  recommendations to assist the COP in the review and  assessment of FCCC implementation and in the preparation  and implementation of its decisions.

### AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE

The AGBM met eight  times between August 1995 and COP-3 in December 1997.  During the first three sessions, delegates focused on  analyzing and assessing what the possible P&Ms to  strengthen the commitments of Annex I Parties could be, how  Annex I countries might distribute or share new commitments  and whether commitments should take the form of an  amendment or a protocol. AGBM-4, which coincided with COP-2  in Geneva in July 1996, completed its in-depth analysis of  the likely elements of a protocol and States appeared ready  to prepare a negotiating text. At AGBM-5, in December 1996,  delegates recognized the need to decide whether to permit  Annex I Parties to use mechanisms that would give them  flexibility in meeting their quantified emissions  limitation and reduction objectives (QELROs).

As the protocol was drafted during the sixth and seventh  sessions of the AGBM, in March and August 1997  respectively, delegates streamlined a framework compilation  text by merging or eliminating some overlapping provisions  within the myriad of proposals. Much of the discussion  centered on a proposal from the EU for a 15% cut in a  basket of three greenhouse gases (GHG) by the year 2010  compared to 1990 emissions levels. In October 1997, as  AGBM-8 began, US President Bill Clinton called for  'meaningful participation' by developing countries in the  negotiating position he had announced in Washington. In  response, the G-77/China distanced itself from attempts to  draw developing countries into agreeing to new commitments.

### COP-3

The third Conference of the Parties (COP-3) was held  from 1-11 December 1997, in Kyoto, Japan. Over 10,000  participants, including representatives from governments,  intergovernmental organizations (IGOs), non-governmental  organizations (NGOs) and the media attended the Conference,  which included a high-level segment featuring statements  from over 125 ministers. Following intense formal and  informal negotiations, Parties to the FCCC adopted the  Kyoto Protocol on 11 December 1997.

In the Protocol, Annex I Parties to the FCCC agreed to  commitments with a view to reducing their overall emissions  of six greenhouse gases (GHGs) by at least 5% below 1990  levels between 2008 and 2012. The Protocol also established  emissions trading, Joint Implementation (JI) between  developed countries, and a Clean Development Mechanism  (CDM) to encourage joint emissions reduction projects  between developed and developing countries. To date, 29  Parties have ratified or acceded to the Protocol. The  Protocol will enter into force 90 days after it is ratified  by 55 Parties to the FCCC, including Annex I Parties  representing at least 55% of the total carbon dioxide (CO2)  equivalent emissions for 1990.

### COP-4

The fourth Conference of the Parties (COP-4) was  held from 2-13 November 1998, in Buenos Aires, Argentina. A  high-level segment, which included statements from over 100  ministers and heads of delegation, was convened on  Thursday, 12 November. Following hours of high-level  closed-door negotiations and a final Plenary session,  delegates adopted the Buenos Aires Plan of Action (BAPA).  Under the BAPA, the Parties declared their determination to  strengthen the implementation of the FCCC and prepare for  the future entry into force of the Protocol. The BAPA  contains the Parties' resolution to demonstrate substantial  progress on: the financial mechanism; the development and  transfer of technology; the implementation of FCCC Articles  4.8 and 4.9, as well as Protocol Articles 2.3 and 3.14  (adverse effects); activities implemented jointly (AIJ);  the mechanisms of the Protocol; and the preparations for  the first Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting  of the Parties to the Protocol (COP/MOP-1).

### SB-10

The subsidiary bodies to the FCCC held their tenth  sessions in Bonn, Germany, from 31 May - 11 June 1999, and  began the process of fulfilling the BAPA. SBSTA considered  topics such as Annex I communications, methodological  issues and the development and transfer of technology. SBI  discussed, inter alia, administrative and financial matters  and non-Annex I communications. SBI and SBSTA jointly  considered the mechanisms of the Protocol, AIJ and  compliance.

### COP-5

The fifth Conference of the Parties (COP-5) met in  Bonn, Germany, from 25 October - 5 November 1999. Delegates  continued working toward fulfilling the BAPA. During the  two-week meeting, delegates deliberated decisions for the  COP during SBI-11 and SBSTA-11. Ninety-three ministers and  other heads of delegation addressed COP-5 during a high- level segment held from 2-3 November. COP-5 adopted 32  draft decisions and conclusions on, inter alia, the review  of the implementation of commitments and other FCCC  provisions, and preparations for COP/MOP-1.

### SB-12

The twelfth sessions of the subsidiary bodies were  held from 12-16 June 2000, in Bonn, Germany, preceded by  one week of informal meetings, held from 5-10 June. In  addition, a number of workshops and informal consultations  were held during the months prior to SB-12. Delegates to  SB-12 and the informal meetings resumed work toward  fulfilling the BAPA. During the course of SB-12 and the  preceding informal meetings, delegates focused on laying  the foundations for negotiations on a comprehensive  agreement to be completed at COP-6. This resulted in the  adoption of 21 draft conclusions on various issues,  including P&Ms, land use, land-use change and forestry  (LULUCF), guidelines under Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the  Protocol, technology transfer, and mechanisms. Between SB- 12 and SB-13, a number of informal consultations and  workshops were convened to advance discussions on key  issues to be resolved at COP-6, including those relating to  LULUCF, the mechanisms, compliance, technology transfer and  adverse effects.

# REPORT OF SB-13

During the first part of SB-13, held from 11-15 September,  SBI considered and adopted conclusions relating to Annex I  communications, non-Annex I communications, the financial  mechanism, and administrative and financial matters, as  well as a draft decision to be forwarded for adoption by  COP-6 on the venue of the seventh Conference of the Parties  (COP-7). SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions on issues  such as: LULUCF; the development and transfer of  technologies; 'best practices' in policies and measures  (P&Ms); and guidelines under Articles 5 (methodological  issues), 7 (communication of information) and 8 (review of  information) of the Kyoto Protocol. SBI and SBSTA jointly  addressed and agreed to conclusions on adverse effects,  capacity building, compliance and the Protocol mechanisms.  The subsidiary bodies were assisted in their work by a pre- sessional week of informal meetings held from 4-9 September  aimed at developing negotiating text for SB-13. During the  formal session, seven contact groups, a joint SBI/SBSTA  working group and numerous informal consultations and  meetings were also held. SB-13 was suspended on 15  September and will resume at COP-6.

## WELCOMING CEREMONY

SB-13 formally opened on Monday morning, 11 September. COP- 5 President Jan Szyszko (Poland) welcomed delegates to Lyon  and encouraged them to look for common ground and explore  compromises in order to streamline negotiating texts and  achieve success at COP-6.

FCCC Executive Secretary Michael Zammit Cutajar drew  participants' attention to two political challenges: the  need to support developing countries in their response to  climate change impacts; and the importance of realizing the  goals of the Protocol. He cautioned against attempts to  renegotiate parts of the Protocol, since this would result  in its collapse. He also expressed regret at the passing  away of two prominent figures in climate change  negotiations: Jean Ripert of France, who chaired the  Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee that resulted in  the adoption of the FCCC in 1992; and Zhong Shukong,  Special Advisor on Environmental Issues in China's Ministry  of Foreign Affairs.

Raymond Barre, Mayor of the City of Lyon, expressed his  hope for a successful outcome for SB-13. He noted the  presence of France's Prime Minister and Minister of Spatial  Planning and Environment as a sign of the political and  economic importance attached to the work on climate change.

French Prime Minister Lionel Jospin noted France's active  support for early ratification of the Protocol. He stressed  the importance of domestic action as the most important  instrument to reduce emissions, and said the mechanisms  should be applicable to no more than half of the efforts  from each State. He also expressed caution over the  inclusion of sinks. He urged developing countries not to  postpone action, and recommended expeditious adoption of  the CDM. He stated that his Government's recent measures to  mitigate the impact of rising oil prices did not compromise  France's climate change programme.

# SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE

SBSTA Chair Harald Dovland (Norway) opened the first  meeting of SBSTA's thirteenth session on Monday, 11  September, shortly after the welcoming ceremony. During  this meeting, delegates briefly considered organizational  matters, adopting the provisional agenda and organization  of work for the session (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/L.5).

## METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES

### LULUCF

The topic of land use, land-use change and forestry  was considered in informal meeting held during the pre- sessional week. Co-Chaired by Halldor Thorgeirsson  (Iceland) and Philip Gwage (Uganda), the group met in six  informal sessions between Monday, 4 September, and  Saturday, 9 September. Participants considered Parties'  submissions on LULUCF contained in a consolidated synthesis  document prepared by the Secretariat, the compilation text  of country-specific data and information submitted by  Parties by 1 August, and the document on implications of  accounting frameworks on preliminary assigned amounts  during the first commitment period. During SB-13, delegates  addressed the issue on Monday, 11 September. A contact  group on LULUCF was convened and met three times between  Tuesday, 12 September, and Thursday, 14 September, to  consider the Co-Chairs' text on elements related to Article  3.3 (afforestation, reforestation and deforestation) and  3.4 (additional activities), and SBSTA conclusions. In  addition, a special session on LULUCF and the CDM was  convened on Thursday, 14 September. SBSTA adopted  conclusions on LULUCF on Friday, 15 September.

Starting on Monday, 4 September, participants at the  informal sessions considered Parties' consolidated  submissions on LULUCF, focusing on: proposed definitions  and accounting approaches under Article 3.3; how and which  additional human-induced activities might be included under  Article 3.4, including modalities, rules and guidelines  related to these activities and their accounting;  methodologies for measuring and reporting in relation to  Article 3.3 and 3.4 activities; overall accounting  approaches in relation to the requirements of Article 3.3,  3.4 and 3.7 (calculating assigned amounts in the first  commitment period); reversibility, natural effects and  accounting interlinkages; and other issues.

Luiz Gylvan Meira Filho, President of the Brazilian Space  Agency, gave a presentation outlining the implications of  different approaches to including LULUCF among climate  change mitigation objectives under the Protocol. He noted  the current temporary uptake of carbon in the biosphere due  to natural effects, and said that under a full carbon  accounting approach, Annex I countries would be allowed to  emit more than under a business-as-usual scenario. Co-Chair  Thorgeirsson introduced the compilation text of country- specific data and information submitted by Parties, and the  document on implications of accounting frameworks on  preliminary assigned amounts during the first commitment  period. The EU and Tuvalu noted gaps in existing data, and  stressed data as a crucial input to the negotiating  process. Australia noted that Annex I countries had the  capacity to make adequate carbon measurements.

Co-Chair Thorgeirsson then requested delegates to focus on  key unresolved issues. On separating natural effects from  human-induced effects, Switzerland, opposed by Canada,  supported a negotiated threshold to deal with the human- induced effects, which could also be adjusted to deal with  issues of uncertainty and permanence. On eligibility of  Article 3.4 activities, Tuvalu drew attention to the  insufficiency of existing data, suggesting it would be  difficult to base a sound decision on such data. On  limitation of debits and credits of additional activities,  the US supported using a threshold, opposed using a cap,  and said a possible phase-in approach should provide  incentives to take action. On aggregation-degradation,  Australia said he could support a process decision at COP- 6.

On 9 September, Co-Chair Thorgeirsson introduced the new  Co-Chairs' text on elements related to Article 3.3 and 3.4  that would be the basis for deliberations during SB-13.

During the formal SB-13, delegates initially addressed the  issue of LULUCF at the SBSTA Plenary on Monday, 11  September. Japan stated its opposition to separating human- induced and natural effects, while Switzerland said the  integrity of the Protocol depended on their separation. The  EU said additional activities under Article 3.4 should not  be applied during the first commitment period unless its  concerns related to scale, uncertainties and risks  associated with sinks were resolved. Canada expressed  confidence that these concerns could be met and, with  Japan, stressed inclusion of Article 3.4 activities in the  first commitment period as a condition for ratification of  the Protocol. A contact group was then convened to continue  discussions.

On Tuesday, 12 September, Brazil, on behalf of the G-77/China, presented basic principles for Article 3.3 and  3.4 to the contact group. He said that, inter alia:  activities should not change the Protocol's global climate  change mitigation effect; forest conservation and  rehabilitation of degraded lands should be recognized as  adaptation activities and receive a share of the  mechanisms' proceeds; a transfer of commitments to a future  commitment period should not be allowed; carbon removed  through LULUCF activities should be considered temporary;  and the simple presence of carbon stocks in national  reservoirs should not result in credits in line with  Article 5.2 (adjustments). Co-Chair Gwage said the  principles outlined by the G-77/China would provide the  basis for a preamble for a decision on Article 3.3 and 3.4.

On Wednesday, 13 September, delegates provided their views  on the Co-Chairs' text on elements related to Article 3.3  and 3.4. Switzerland submitted a written proposal on behalf  of the Environmental Integrity Group (Switzerland, Republic  of Korea and Mexico). Following discussions, Co-Chair  Thorgeirsson noted support by several Parties for the FAO  forest definition with Party-specific thresholds, and by  some for definitions at the international level, as  determined by the COP. He recognized that Parties did not  find a separate definition of 'historic' with regards to  afforestation and reforestation useful. He said some  Parties suggested removing paragraphs distinguishing  harvesting from deforestation, and that the group would  consider the issue of degradation further. He said he had  received useful guidance on the size of the assessment  unit, and welcomed discussion of forest management.  Bolivia, on behalf of several Latin American countries,  introduced a textual proposal that also related to Article  12 (CDM).

On Thursday, 14 September, the contact group considered  draft SBSTA conclusions. Tuvalu said conclusions on text  that had yet to be discussed by the group would be  premature, and New Zealand suggested bracketing the draft  decision text for COP-6 and COP/MOP-1.

Continuing consideration of the Co-Chairs' text on elements  related to Article 3.3 and 3.4, several Parties drew  attention to their submissions on the text as compiled in a  new miscellaneous document.

In a special session on the evening of Thursday, 14  September, delegates considered the issue of LULUCF  projects within the CDM. Brazil, Peru, Chile, Colombia, New  Zealand, Costa Rica, Bolivia, Australia, the US, Japan,  Uruguay, Canada, Norway and the Environmental Integrity  Group argued in favor of inclusion, citing a variety of  motivations and preconditions. The EU, Tuvalu, Samoa, China  and Jamaica urged that the CDM exclude provision for sinks.

On Friday, 15 September, SBSTA adopted conclusions on  LULUCF (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/L.6 and Add.1). These conclusions  note with appreciation the documents considered during the  session, and invite the Chair to further develop the  elements of a draft decision on Article 3.3 and 3.4 based  on oral and written Party input during the first part of  SBSTA-13, and on informal consultations in Viterbo, Italy,  scheduled for 9-11 October 2000. The conclusions urge  Parties that have yet to supply complete data related to  LULUCF to do so by 1 November 2000.

### GUIDELINES UNDER ARTICLES 5, 7 AND 8 OF THE PROTOCOL

Delegates in the group on guidelines under Protocol  Articles 5 (methodological issues), 7 (communication of  information) and 8 (review of information) met in seven  informal sessions between Monday, 4 September and Saturday,  9 September, to elaborate the guidelines under Articles 7  and 8. A small drafting group also met to further the work  on guidelines under Article 8 and guidance under Article  5.2 (adjustments) as a basis for further negotiation. At  the formal SBSTA Plenary on Monday, 11 September, a contact  group was formed. This group met three times. The  conclusions developed during these contact group meetings  were adopted by SBSTA on Friday, 15 September.

On Monday, 4 September, the Co-Chairs of the informal  sessions, Helen Plume (New Zealand) and Festus Luboyera  (South Africa), noted that some issues considered by the  group would be further elaborated at a later stage, as they  depended on the work of other groups, such as on LULUCF,  adverse effects and the mechanisms. Co-Chair Plume stressed  the need to move forward on the elements without pre- empting the work of the other groups. The group briefly  considered the draft guidelines under Article 8. A number  of participants preferred replacing the term 'shall' with  'may' when referring to the tasks of the Expert Review  Teams (ERTs). Saudi Arabia said the G-77/China was not in a  position to comment on text and needed more time. Under  draft guidelines under Article 7, the group considered the  crosscutting issue of assigned amount reporting by Parties.  Following the introduction of the relevant draft text from  the mechanisms group by the Secretariat, delegates  discussed timeframes and modes for reporting on information  under assigned amounts.

In the subsection on guidelines under Article 7.1  (inclusion of supplementary information in annual  inventories), the US, opposed by the EU and Australia,  proposed deleting the section on adjustments in accordance  with Article 5.2, maintaining that reporting should be the  responsibility of the review team, not the Party. On  consideration of Article 7.2 (inclusion of supplementary  information in national communications), the US, Norway,  Saudi Arabia and the EU questioned the timing for the  submission of national communications and where this should  be treated. On national registries, the US underscored the  importance of discussions on the mechanisms for the work in  this group.

On Friday, 8 September, delegates completed discussions on  the guidelines under Article 7. Saudi Arabia, on behalf of  the G-77/China, opposed by the EU, suggested new headings  on information related to transfer of technology and  additional financial resources, and highlighted their  textual proposal on information on implementation of  Protocol Article 3.14. New Zealand proposed a new heading  on issuance and cancellation of assigned amounts under  Protocol Article 3.3 and 3.4.

On Saturday, 9 September, Parties continued deliberations  on Part I of the guidelines under Article 8, General  Approach to Review. The G-77/China bracketed most of the  text, citing insufficient time to consider it. The  Secretariat distributed draft decisions on national systems  under Article 5.1, methodologies for adjustments under  Article 5.2, and guidelines under Articles 7 and 8, to be  taken by COP-6 and COP/MOP-1.

At the SBSTA Plenary on Monday, 11 September, a formal  contact group was convened, which met three times during  the week. Delegates considered draft conclusions for the  first part of SBSTA-13, and draft decision text on Article  5.2 for COP-6 and COP/MOP-1, and the draft guidelines under  Article 8 as progressed by the small drafting group during  the previous week.

During discussions in the contact groups, Co-Chair Plume  noted that the draft conclusions under consideration did  not specify whether separate decisions would be taken at  COP-6 on the guidelines under Articles 5,7 and 8. She  highlighted the proposal to hold an informal consultation  on these matters in October. On demonstrable progress,  Saudi Arabia, opposed by the EU, proposed deleting the  paragraph recognizing the first national communication  submitted under Article 7.2, stressing that the approach  was too narrow. Switzerland suggested compromise language  that was accepted by the group, referring in general to  Article 7 rather than specifically to Article 7.2.

On the draft decision text on Article 5.2 for COP-6 and  COP/MOP-1, Saudi Arabia, supported by Tuvalu, Peru, China  and Brazil, and opposed by the US and New Zealand,  suggested deleting references to activities under Article  3.3 and 3.4 at this stage.

In discussions of Part II of the guidelines under Article  8, Review of Annual Inventories, delegates bracketed many  paragraphs. Under identification and classification of  problems by ERTs, the US, opposed by the EU, proposed  moving the section on classification, stressing that ERT's  should identify rather than classify problems. On timing,  the US suggested setting strict deadlines for submission of  reports, while leaving broader issues flexible. Parties  considered New Zealand's proposal on Part III of the  guidelines under Article 8, Review of Information on  Assigned Amounts, and Part III bis, Annual Compilation and  Accounting of Emission Inventories and Assigned Amounts.  The G-77/China proposed bracketing the entire text. On the  scope of the review, the EU suggested that it cover  cancellation of assigned amount units, including  cancellation with respect to Article 3.3 and 3.4. Co-Chair  Plume introduced Part IV of the guidelines under Article 8,  Review of National Systems, based on submissions from the  EU and Australia. On Thursday, 14 September, Co-Chair Plume  closed the contact group after inviting Parties to submit  views on the guidelines under Articles 5.2, 7 and 8 to the  Secretariat before 29 September.

The conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/L.7 and Add.1,2,3) adopted  at the SBSTA Plenary include agreement that the SBSTA, at  the second part of SBSTA-13, will further consider  guidelines under Articles 7 and 8 and possible elements for  a draft decision or decisions on Articles 5.1, 5.2, 7 and  8, which are attached as addenda to the conclusions. SBSTA  also invited the Chair to further develop the draft texts  relating to guidelines under Articles 7 and 8 and  methodologies for adjustments under Article 5.2, based on  oral and written views expressed by Parties during the  first part of SBSTA-13 and at informal consultations prior  to the second part of SBSTA-13, with a view to recommending  a draft decision on the matters at COP-6 for adoption at  COP/MOP-1.

### IMPACT OF SINGLE PROJECTS ON EMISSIONS IN THE COMMITMENT  PERIOD

SBSTA considered this item in Plenary on Monday, 11  September. Chair Dovland noted that Parties had made no  submissions on the matter by 17 July 2000, as requested by  SBSTA-11. Following statements by Iceland and other Annex I  countries, he concluded that full agreement had yet to be  reached, and requested Ole Plougmann (Denmark) to conduct  informal consultations on the issue.

On Friday, 15 September, Plougmann reported that although  Parties had come to the meeting without a political mandate  to negotiate text for a draft decision, they had been  active in exchanging ideas and concerns. He noted that  Parties had expressed a wish to reflect further on the  material produced and to continue consideration of the  issue during the second part of SBSTA-13, with the aim of  developing a decision for COP-6. SBSTA adopted its  conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/L.5), agreeing to consider the  issue further at its next session.

### OTHER METHODOLOGICAL MATTERS

Emissions resulting from fuel  used in international transportation: On Monday, 11  September, the Secretariat reported on cooperation with  International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) and the  International Maritime Organization (IMO), and on efforts  within these organizations to identify options to limit and  reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Chair Dovland noted their  progress reports, as requested by SBSTA-11. The IMO  introduced its study on greenhouse gas emissions from  ships, which will be available at SBSTA-14.

 On Friday, 15 September, delegates adopted SBSTA  conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/L.5) on this issue,  encouraging ICAO and IMO to complete their work as soon as  possible, and noting the importance of coordination by  Parties at the national level of their work related to  greenhouse gas emissions from international aviation and  shipping.

Methods and tools for vulnerability and adaptation  assessments: Delegates considered this issue on Monday, 11  September. Chair Dovland drew attention to the methods and  tools to assess climate change impacts and adaptation. The  Secretariat noted that a workshop with IPCC experts would  be held following the release of the IPCC Third Assessment  Report (TAR) in April 2001. In the conclusions  (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/L.8) adopted on Friday, 15 September,  SBSTA requests the Secretariat to organize a workshop with  participation of the IPCC experts and the user community to  explore: developing country experiences in applying current  impact and adaptation methodologies and their emerging  needs; the current state of the art of methods identified  in the IPCC TAR; and options for improving the quality and  dissemination of information on impact adaptation  methodologies. The Secretariat is requested to report the  results of the workshop at SBSTA-14. Parties were invited  to actively participate in and provide support for the  workshop.

## DEVELOPMENT AND TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGIES - STATUS OF THE CONSULTATIVE PROCESS

Delegates considered the development and transfer of  technology in informal workshops held from 5 - 9 September.  It was considered further in contact group discussions  convened by SBSTA and Co-Chaired by Dean Cooper (Canada)  and Oladapo Afolabi (Nigeria), from 11-14 September.

On Tuesday, 5 September, delegates considered the report of  the consultations of the Friends of the Chair on  development and transfer of technology held in Colorado,  USA. The conclusions, contained in a non-paper, highlighted  the five key themes for a draft framework for the  enhancement and effective implementation of technology  development and transfer under the FCCC, identified at  SBSTA-12: technology needs and needs assessment, technology  information, enabling environments, capacity building and  mechanisms for technology transfer.

During the informal workshops, delegates heard  presentations by the Secretariat on a possible framework  for a technology transfer system, and by the Climate  Technology Initiative on its website. In the discussions,  the Philippines, speaking on behalf of the G-77/China,  expressed concern that needs were still being assessed  after five years. She proposed including a section in the  framework addressing actions taken to implement the  technology transfer commitments. On needs assessment,  Canada and the US proposed an integrated approach beyond  needs assessment in a narrow sense, to improve the enabling  environment for technology transfer. Other issues raised  include the role of a clearinghouse, the use of existing  institutions, and the need to avoid duplication of matters  being addressed elsewhere. The US said capacity building  for the identification of CDM projects could maximize their  use for technology transfer.

Regarding the mechanisms for technology transfer,  participants discussed the GEF's role, whether to establish  an intergovernmental technical advisory panel and a funding  mechanism for technology transfer, and the need for  integrated approaches. Several participants said official  development assistance (ODA) should not be used for  technology transfer, since this would be a distortion of  development priorities. The Republic of Korea stressed the  need to examine the supply of technology. The GEF said  existing programmes, such as the Medium-Sized Projects  programme, could be used as a means for transferring  technology.

On Monday, 11 September, SBSTA considered technology  development and transfer during its opening session. A  contact group on technology transfer was convened and met  several times from 12-14 September. During this time,  delegates discussed a revised Co-Chairs' draft framework to  enhance implementation of FCCC Article 4.5 (development and  transfer of technology), which drew on the discussions  during the week of informal meetings. They then considered  the different themes of the draft framework. There was  divergence over the purpose of the framework, with the US,  Canada and the EU stating that it should enhance  implementation of Article 4.5. The G-77/China emphasized  that the framework shall serve as a framework for  implementation of Article 4.5 commitments, and stressed  that the extent to which developing countries can implement  their commitments under the FCCC depended on effective  participation by developed countries. Other issues  discussed included whether to refer to 'state of the art  technologies,' the use of the term 'equitable' when  referring to the technology transfer process, and the  meaning of 'integrated approaches.' On Thursday, 14 September, delegates discussed the Co- Chairs' draft conclusions. The US, EU and Canada objected  to a G-77/China call to include reference to a draft  decision it had tabled earlier in the day, noting that they  had not seen it.

The G-77/China proposed deleting a paragraph in the Co- Chairs' conclusions that invite the SBSTA Chair, with the  assistance of the Secretariat, to provide additional  reports on the outcome of the regional workshop, noting the  limited time at COP-6 for negotiations. She questioned the  purpose of additional information and its input to the  discussions. The UK said the workshop would inform  negotiators new to the process. Malaysia noted that the  SBSTA Chair had the discretion to decide if and when to  organize informal meetings.

On Friday, 15 September, SBSTA adopted its draft  conclusions on the status of the consultative process on  technology development and transfer  (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/CRP.8). The conclusions note the report by  the Chair on the status of the transfer of technology  consultative process and the draft text of a framework for  meaningful and effective actions to enhance the  implementation of Article 4.5, and agree to consider a  revised draft text (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/CRP.8/Add.1) and  additional submissions on this matter received from  Parties, including document FCCC/SBSTA/2000/MISC.9, at the  second part of SB-13. In the conclusions, SBSTA also  invites the Chair, with the assistance of the Secretariat,  to organize an informal meeting and brief presentation at  the resumed SB-13 in November on the regional workshops on  the technology transfer consultative process, and requests  the Secretariat to further elaborate a proposal for  activities in the area of technology information taking  into account, inter alia, the resource implications of  continuing this work at different levels of effort. The  draft framework (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/CRP.8/Add.1) is annexed to  the conclusions.

## 'BEST PRACTICES' IN POLICIES AND MEASURES

The issue of 'best practices' in polices and measures  (P&Ms) among Annex I Parties was addressed in two informal  meetings during the pre-sessional week, at a SBSTA Plenary  session on Monday, 11 September, and in two subsequent  contact groups. Conclusions and elements for a draft  decision on P&Ms were adopted by SBSTA on Friday, 15  September.

During the informal meeting on Tuesday, 5 September, Co- Chair José Romero (Switzerland) summarized the outcome of  the P&Ms workshop held in April in Copenhagen, and briefly  reviewed the discussions at SBSTA-12. He requested Parties  to focus on developing a decision for COP-6. The EU  proposed objectives relating to: information exchange and  experience; facilitating cooperation between Parties; and  facilitating assessment of demonstrable progress. Canada  asked whether facilitating cooperation would be a  bilateral, trilateral or multilateral exercise. The US and  Australia said countries could demonstrate progress through  institutional and legal steps taken to achieve Protocol  Article 3.1 commitments, while Japan suggested the  assessment be based on national communications. The  Marshall Islands, speaking for AOSIS, stressed the need for  Annex I Parties to take domestic action through P&Ms, while  Zimbabwe highlighted their impact on developing countries.  On text for a COP-6 decision, the EU emphasized the need  for a 'continuous and structured process' to address the  issues within its proposed objectives. Switzerland, with  AOSIS, supported using the EU proposal as the basis for the  COP-6 decision. Tanzania sought clarity on the need for a  separate reporting system for demonstrable progress, and  proposed specifying timeframes for information exchange.  Peru underlined cost implications associated with best  practices.

On Thursday, 7 September, Co-Chair Richard Muyungi  (Tanzania) presented draft conclusions and elements for a  draft decision. The G-77/China asked the Co-Chair to  postpone discussion on the draft text pending internal G-77/China consideration. Parties made general comments  related to, inter alia: continuing work into the future;  avoiding reference to issues under discussion in other  groups; and ensuring that the outcome is focused on helping  to implement the provisions of Protocol Article 2 (P&Ms).

At the SBSTA-13 meeting on Monday, 11 September, the EU  emphasized experience sharing and information exchange,  identifying opportunities for cooperation, and contributing  to the assessment of demonstrable progress. Canada, with  the US and Japan, emphasized that the Copenhagen workshop  on P&Ms fulfilled relevant BAPA requirements. He  recommended avoiding linkages with other issues, including  demonstrable progress. Uruguay highlighted the possible  impact of P&Ms on developing countries. A contact group was  established.

At the first contact group meeting on Tuesday, 12  September, delegates considered text on elements for a  draft decision. The US proposed a revised title referring  to cooperation, facilitation and Article 2.1(b)  (cooperation on P&Ms). Saudi Arabia opposed this proposal,  supporting the original title amended to refer to 'good  practices.' Regarding the draft decision, delegates  accepted text proposed by the US acknowledging completion  of the BAPA requirements. On continuing information  exchange, delegates discussed revised text proposed by the  US on 'considering ways' to facilitate cooperation on P&Ms  under Article 2.1(b). The G-77/China proposed bracketing  reference to sub-paragraphs 1 and b. Venezuela, opposed by  the US and Canada, included reference to Protocol Article  2.3 (adverse effects of P&Ms). The G-77/China, opposed by  Canada and Japan, urged limiting the scope of the decision  to Annex I Parties. The EU, opposed by Canada, Japan and  Australia, emphasized the establishment of a consultative  process to ensure continuity of information exchange. On  the nature of future activities, Canada, the US and Japan,  opposed by the EU, proposed reference to 'future work'  rather than a 'consultative process.' Japan and Australia  highlighted information exchange on cross-sectoral issues.  The EU and Switzerland advocated an additional sentence on  improving mutual understanding and learning.

Delegates completed discussions on the elements for a draft  decision at a meeting of the contact group on Wednesday, 13  September. Canada, the US, Japan and Australia, opposed by  the EU, urged bracketing all references to the  'consultative process.' The US and Japan bracketed the list  of activities aimed at improving the transparency,  effectiveness and comparability of P&Ms. Japan and the US,  opposed by the EU and G-77/China, advocated deleting the  link between P&Ms and demonstrable progress. Japan  questioned reference to measuring demonstrable progress by  means of criteria and quantitative parameters. The G-77/China and Saudi Arabia, opposed by Canada and Australia,  proposed text on the need to minimize the adverse effects  of Annex I Parties' P&Ms.

On the contribution of international organizations to the  process, the G-77/China and Saudi Arabia urged specific  reference to OPEC. Hungary and the EU proposed reference to  'relevant international and intergovernmental  organizations.' The US bracketed a request to the  Secretariat to organize a workshop and to report the  workshop results to COP-7. The G-77/China proposed instead  that the results of the listed activities for improving the  transparency, effectiveness and comparability of P&Ms be  reported. Delegates briefly considered the draft SBSTA  conclusions. References to Article 2.1 and to a  consultative process were deleted.

On Friday, 15 September, SBSTA adopted conclusions on P&Ms  (FCC/SBSTA/2000/CRP.9) that: recognize with appreciation,  the role of the workshop on 'best practices' in P&Ms, held  in Copenhagen in April 2000, in advancing work on sharing  experience and exchanging information on P&Ms; note the  progress made on this matter; and decide to forward to the  second part of SBSTA-13 in November the elements of a draft  decision to be recommended to COP-6. Draft elements for a  decision are attached as an annex to the conclusion. Much  of the text remains bracketed, reflecting the divergent  opinions presented during the contact group discussions.

## COOPERATION WITH RELEVANT INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

Delegates considered cooperation with relevant  international organizations on Monday, 11 September. The  Secretariat said that fifth meeting of the COP of the  Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) had passed a  decision on climate change issues, including LULUCF and  coral reefs. He undertook to provide further information at  the second part of SBSTA-13.

On Friday, 15 September, SBSTA adopted conclusions on  cooperation with relevant international organizations  (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/L.5). In these conclusions, SBSTA takes  note of the information provided by the Secretariat  regarding cooperation between the Secretariat and UN bodies  and other international conventions, particularly the CBD,  and requests the Secretariat to continue the cooperation on  substantive matters with the CBD and other UN conventions  and agencies, and to inform it at subsequent sessions of  the progress achieved.

## OTHER MATTERS

On Monday, 11 September, delegates heard a report from the  Secretariat on the roster of experts. The Secretariat noted  that there are 671 experts on the list, and that updates  were being received on 99 experts, with another 71  nominations being processed.

On Friday, 15 September, SBSTA adopted conclusions on other  matters (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/L.5). In its conclusions, SBSTA  notes that the Secretariat had provided a report on the  status of the roster of experts, and that the Secretariat  encouraged Parties to nominate additional experts for the  roster and to update roster information regularly.

## CLOSING SBSTA PLENARY

In Plenary on the afternoon of Friday, 15 September,  delegates adopted the draft report of SBSTA-13  (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/L.5). Burkina Faso, for the Africa Group,  emphasized the need for the translation and wide  dissemination of technical reports. In his closing remarks,  Chair Dovland noted that while progress had been made, it  was not as much as he had hoped for. He highlighted the  need for delegates to reconsider their positions if COP-6  is to be a success. He gaveled the meeting to a close at  1:05 pm.

# SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION

The first meeting of SBI's thirteenth session was held on  Monday, 11 September, following the SB-13 welcoming  ceremony. SBI Chair John Ashe (Antigua & Barbuda) welcomed  participants, and reported that 184 Parties had ratified or  acceded to the FCCC. At this meeting, delegates considered  organizational matters, adopting the agenda and  organization of work for the session (FCCC/SBI/2000/L.2).

## ANNEX I COMMUNICATIONS: GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORY DATA FROM  1990 TO 1998

On Tuesday, 12 September, the SBI considered the report on  national greenhouse gas inventory data from Annex I Parties  for 1990-1998. Argentina noted successful measures  undertaken by the UK and Germany to reduce emissions and  highlighted continuing emissions increases in the US. He  said Annex I commitments must be met. The EU expressed  satisfaction with the number of Annex I Parties using the  new reporting format. He noted with concern the continuing  emissions increase in some countries.

On Friday, 15 September, the SBI took note of document  FCCC/SBI/2000/11, containing the latest available  information. Chair Ashe noted a request by the G-77/China  to elaborate a further document based on the first one to  provide information on trends in greenhouse gases in Annex  I countries in both tables and graphics in time for COP-6.  The US expressed concern at this issue being introduced at  this stage. Following brief informal consultations,  delegates accepted a proposal requesting the Secretariat to  further elaborate the document in the form of tables and  graphics at COP-6, without prejudice for further  compilation at SBSTA-14. Draft conclusions on national  communications from Annex I Parties will be presented at  the second part of SBI-13 in November.

## NON-ANNEX I COMMUNICATIONS

On Tuesday, 12 September, participants met to discuss non- Annex I national communications. Delegates discussed the  role of the Consultative Group of Experts (CGE), and Kenya  and Vanuatu drew attention to the financial shortfall  facing the CGE. The Philippines said there had been a waste  of resources in relation to the CGE, and called for a  review of its terms of reference. China urged Annex II  countries to provide adequate financial support to CGE. The  US said many Parties regarded the CGE as a useful group,  and supported its activities.

Draft conclusions on provision of financial and technical  support for national communications from non-Annex I  Parties will be presented at the second part of SBI-13. A  report of the second meeting of the CGE, and the second  compilation and synthesis of initial national  communications will be taken up at the second part of SBI- 13.

## FINANCIAL MECHANISM

SBI considered matters relating to the financial mechanism  on Tuesday, 12 September, and Friday, 15 September, as well  as in a number of informal meetings held from 12-15  September.

### SUPPORT TO THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

The SBI briefly addressed this issue on 12 September and  again on 15 September, when it adopted the SBI Chair's  draft conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2000/CRP.10). These conclusions  take note of the IPCC Chair's statement on the status of  the project proposal on capacity building: Assessments of  Vulnerability and Adaptation to Climate Change in Multiple  Regions and Sectors in Coordination with the IPCC. The  conclusions also note that the GEF has approved a Project  Preparation and Development Facility grant of US $350,000  for the development of a full proposal.

### REPORT OF THE GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY TO THE COP

At  its third meeting on Tuesday, 12 September, the SBI decided  to consider this sub-item formally during the second part  of SB-13. However, on Tuesday, 12 September, Parties also  engaged in an informal question-and-answer session with GEF  Chair and CEO Mohamed El-Ashry. Responding to Kenya's  comment on the difficulties in dealing with the  implementing agencies, El-Ashry said the GEF was trying to  improve the responsiveness of the implementing agencies. He  assured delegates that the GEF would act according to the  guidance received from the COP. On questions about whether  the GEF might reconsider its current focus on mitigation  projects in favor of other areas, such as adaptation, once  the CDM is introduced, El-Ashry noted the limited guidance  provided by the COP on adaptation activities, and added  that the specifics of the CDM had yet to be decided.  However, he assured Parties that the GEF would avoid  duplication. El-Ashry said Parties should communicate their  concerns so that any problems could be addressed.

### OTHER MATTERS RELATED TO THE FINANCIAL MECHANISM

Additional guidance to the GEF: On Tuesday, 12 September,  SBI briefly took up the matter of additional guidance to  the GEF. The issue was considered further during informal  consultations held from 12-15 September. These  consultations focused on a proposed draft decision  submitted by the G-77/China containing additional guidance  to the GEF in its role as the operating entity of the  financial mechanism. The proposal aims at integrating  decisions that refer to the GEF's activities. In further  consultations, Parties responded to and discussed the text.  The US, with Canada and the EU said the proposal addressed  issues currently under consideration in other negotiating  groups, such as discussions on Stage III adaptation, and  cautioned against moving beyond other related negotiations.  The G-77/China said ongoing discussions in other groups  should not prevent guidance being given to the financial  mechanism.

In the SBI Plenary on Friday, 15 September, Chair Ashe  announced that consideration of this matter would continue  during the second part of SB-13, and that a contact group  would be convened, chaired by Kerry Groves (Australia) and  SBI Chair Ashe. Delegates adopted the draft Chair's  conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2000/CRP.9), noting the establishment  of this contact group to consider this text, following a  small amendment proposed by the US to delete a request for  additional submissions 'by 22 September.' The draft  decision (FCCC/SBI/2000/CRP.9/Add.1), which will be the  subject of contact group discussions, remains bracketed  almost in its entirety. It provides additional advice to  the GEF in the light of the launch of negotiations on the  GEF's third replenishment. The text, inter alia, decides  that the GEF should provide financial resources to  developing country Parties, in particular the least  developed and small island developing States in a range of  activities relating to capacity building.

## VENUE OF COP-7

SBI considered this agenda item on Tuesday, 12 September.  Delegates adopted a draft decision on the matter for  adoption by COP-6 (FCCC/SBI/2000/L.3), which accepts with  gratitude the offer of the Kingdom of Morocco to host COP-7  and decides that it will be held in Marrakech from 29  October - 9 November 2001.

## ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL MATTERS

### POSSIBLE OPTIONS TO RESPOND TO LATE PAYMENT OF  CONTRIBUTIONS

On Monday, 11 September, delegates engaged  in informal consultations. The US, with the Russian  Federation, addressed the issue of late payment of dues,  seeking information on existing practices in other UN  forums. Speaking for several developing countries, Iran  asked for a postponement of the discussion until COP-6, and  Argentina added that the options included were  unacceptable. The US stated that 89% of dues had been  collected this year, while the Secretariat noted that,  although this was correct, one-third of Parties had not yet  paid.

SBI considered this issue in Plenary on Tuesday, 12  September. Mahmoud Ould El Ghaouth (Mauritania) reported  that the informal consultations were still ongoing and that  Parties preferred deferring finalizing the draft decision  until the second part of SBI-13.

In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2000/L.2), the SBI decided  that the Chair should continue informal consultations and  decisions on this item be postponed until the second part  of SBI-13, with a view to recommending a draft decision for  adoption by COP-6.

### AUDITED FINANCIAL REPORTS 1998-1999 AND INTERIM FINANCIAL  PERFORMANCE 2000

SBI considered these sub-items on  Tuesday, 12 September. Delegates took note of the  Secretariat's report on the audited financial report (1999)  and interim financial performance (2000). On Friday, 15  September, SBI adopted its recommendations  (FCCC/SBI/2000/CRP.8) to COP-6 to, inter alia:invite the Executive Secretary to report on the  implementation of the audit recommendations; urge Parties that have not paid their contributions to  the core budget, to do so with out further delay; note the initiative of the Executive Secretaries of  the FCCC and the Convention to Combat Desertification to  establish common administrative and support services; request the Executive Secretary to submit for SBI-14  consideration, a proposed programme budget for the biennium  2002-2003; and request the SBI to recommend a programme budget for  adoption by COP-6.

### IMPLEMENTATION OF THE HEADQUARTERS AGREEMENT

On Tuesday,  12 September, SBI Chair Ashe recalled concerns raised at  SBI-12 relating to integration with the host country,  namely inadequate office space and difficulties acquiring  visas and work permits. Germany provided an interim report  on action being taken, noting progress that has been made  to resolve these issues. In its conclusions  (FCCC/SBI/2000/L.2), SBI took note of the statement by  Germany and invited Germany to report on progress at its  next session.

## OTHER MATTERS

On Friday, 15 September, Chair Ashe informed the SBI of a  proposal to revise the schedule at COP-6 for the adoption  of the COP's agenda. Delegates agreed to the suggestion to  adopt the COP-6 agenda on 13 November, at the start of the  first week of COP-6, rather than on 20 November, as  originally planned.

He informed the SBI that there had been consultations on  certain technical problems relating to dates for the first  sessional period in 2001. He said consensus on a suggestion  to change the dates from the end of May 2001 to the first  two weeks of June had not been reached, and the dates would  thus remain unchanged.

## CLOSING SBI PLENARY

On the evening of Friday, 15 September, SBI adopted its  report of the session (FCCC/SBI/2000/L.2). Burkina Faso,  speaking for the Africa Group, congratulated Chair Ashe on  SBI's work. He underscored the need to pay particular  attention to the needs and situations of LDCs. Noting that  LDCs did not feel adequately involved in the work of the  GEF, he said the SBI should request the GEF to focus in  particular on Africa, taking into account the specific  needs of each country, and taking a sub-regional approach  to capacity building. He expressed hope that COP-6 would  produce a successful outcome. The meeting was adjourned  shortly after 8:00 pm.

# JOINT SBI/SBSTA SESSIONS

The first joint SBI/SBSTA meeting took place on Monday, 11  September, with general statements by a number of Parties.  The European Commission expressed hope that COP-6 would  ensure the ratification of the Protocol for entry into  force in 2002. She encouraged strong consequences in cases  of non-compliance. France, on behalf of the EU, suggested  that the momentum from Kyoto had been lost. She urged each  country to assume its responsibility and adopt emissions  reduction measures. Switzerland announced the formation of  the Environmental Integrity Group that also includes Mexico  and South Korea. He said the group would emphasize the need  to achieve 'environmental integrity' in the outcomes of  climate change negotiations.

Nigeria, on behalf of the G-77/China, expressed concern  that developed countries were not engaging in meaningful  FCCC implementation. He stressed the importance of taking  comprehensive decisions on all issues. The Africa Group  noted concerns with availability of translated documents,  the convening of too many meetings and rigid positions  taken by developed countries. Venezuela said developed  countries should not avoid commitments or attempt to  transfer commitments to developing countries. Indonesia  stressed the importance of capacity building, adaptation,  Annex I domestic action, and technology transfer.

## IMPLEMENTATION OF FCCC ARTICLE 4.8 AND 4.9 AND MATTERS  RELATING TO PROTOCOL ARTICLE 3.14 (ADVERSE EFFECTS)

Delegates considered FCCC Article 4.8 and 4.9 and Protocol  Article 3.14 in five informal meetings during the pre- sessional week, at a joint SBI/SBSTA meeting on Monday, 11  September, and in five subsequent joint contact groups. The  informal meetings and contact groups were co-chaired by Bo  Kjellén (Sweden) and Abdulmuhsen Al-Sunaid (Saudi Arabia),  temporarily replacing Mohamad Reza Salamat (Iran), who will  return to take up his position as Co-Chair at the second  part of SBSTA-13. The Chairs' draft conclusions were  adopted at a joint SBI/SBSTA meeting on Friday, 15  September.

In the first informal meetings delegates considered the Co- Chairs' negotiating text that had been the outcome of  inter-sessional consultations in Bonn in August. Zimbabwe,  on behalf of the G-77/China, called for two separate draft  decisions, one on FCCC Article 4.8 and 4.9, and another on  Protocol Article 3.14. Uganda, the Gambia, Nepal, Burkina  Faso, the US and others stressed clear articulation of the  needs and concerns of least developed countries (LDCs) in  the text and decisions.

On adverse effects of climate change, the G-77/China said  emphasis on the use of national communications exclusively  to report on actions and assess vulnerability should not  constrain actions in the most vulnerable and least  developed countries that may not already have disseminated  or compiled this information due to, inter alia, lack of  capacity and funding. The US said other sources of  information for this assessment were also acceptable, and  stressed that any actions should be focused and effective.  In response to the G-77/China's suggestion to create a fund  to support these activities, Japan and the US recalled that  the GEF was the vehicle for this funding. Canada, supported  by Norway, the UK, and US, stressed referring to the  country-driven approach, national circumstances and  sustainable development. Canada suggested requesting the  Secretariat to organize workshops on adverse effects and on  response measures, and report on the outcomes at COP-7.  Delegates discussed the importance of rapid response  systems to climate events. The EU, opposed by several  developing countries, cautioned against creating a separate  disaster fund for climate-related events.

On Protocol Article 3.14, several developed countries noted  that it dealt primarily with the impact of response  measures, and suggested merging it with the previous  section of the text that directly addressed this issue.  Australia, Poland, the US, the EU and other Annex I Parties  expressed reservations on a paragraph inviting Annex I  Parties to provide information on, inter alia, existing  market imperfections and subsidies in the energy sector.  Saudi Arabia urged that the paragraph be retained.

On Friday, 8 September, delegates completed discussions on  the Co-Chairs' draft negotiating text during the informal  sessions. Several Annex I countries, opposed by some  developing countries, suggested deleting a paragraph on  actions related to policy options. Saudi Arabia stressed  the importance of assisting economic diversification in  oil-exporting developing countries, and supported tax  restructuring in Annex I Parties. With Libya, Qatar and  Venezuela, he supported discouraging fossil fuel production  in Annex I countries. Libya underscored the externalities  of nuclear energy.

At a joint SBI/SBSTA meeting on Monday, 11 September, Chair  Dovland noted that negotiating text had been prepared based  on the informal consultations the previous week, in  addition to those held in August. Co-Chair Al-Sunaid noted  progress, but drew attention to disagreements over whether  to have two decisions that address FCCC Article 4.8 and 4.9  and Protocol Article 3.14 separately, or one decision  dealing with both.

The G-77/China called for the will to implement 'long  overdue' actions on FCCC Article 4.8 and 4.9 at COP-6 and,  supported by Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and  Jamaica, but opposed by the EU and the US, reiterated the  call for two separate decisions. Discussions were referred  to a contact group that met five times from 11-15  September.

The contact group continued considering the revised draft  text. On text relating to the provision of information by  LDCs through sources other than national communications,  the G-77/China repeated that many developing countries had  difficulties completing their national communications, and  re-emphasised that other relevant information should also  serve as the basis for determining their adaptation  activities. Vanuatu, on behalf of the LDCs, cited  marginalization in the process, and requested that their  special needs be considered. Burkina Faso underscored the  importance of establishing and strengthening national and  regional institutions for, inter alia, research on climate  change and its adverse effects.

China underscored integrating adaptation into sustainable  development programmes, since this is the ultimate  objective of the FCCC, but stressed the right of a  sovereign State to design its own national policies. The US  cautioned against the implications of this for GEF funding  according to the three-stage process set out by decision  11/CP.1. The EU, supported by the US and Canada, endorsed  text on pilot and/or demonstration projects that support  the concept of learning by doing. The G-77/China preferred  text on immediate implementation of adaptation activities,  where sufficient information is available.

On establishing a fund for climate-related disaster relief,  the EU and the US said that such a fund could add  complexity to the provision of funding due to the  recognized difficulty in distinguishing between natural and  human-induced climate disasters.

Saudi Arabia, supported by several other developing  countries, said Article 3.14 referred only to actions by  Annex I Parties and indicated that it was inappropriate to  suggest that non-Annex I Parties had obligations under this  article. The US supported references to non-Annex I Parties  in the text, as Article 3.14 did not specify whether  actions to be considered by the COP/MOP under this article  were exclusively those of Annex I Parties.

On the impact of response measures, Japan, supported by the  US, but opposed by China and Brazil, stressed that non- Annex II Parties able to support developing countries  should be encouraged to do so. Text on the process of  information analysis was bracketed. The G-77/China, Kuwait  and Venezuela reiterated the importance of technological  development relating to fossil fuels for diversification of  economies in oil exporting developing countries.

On text relating to Article 3.14, the G-77/China, with  Brazil, Colombia, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and Venezuela,  suggested removing the paragraph recognizing the role of  flexibility mechanisms in minimizing the impacts of  response measures on non-Annex I Parties. Australia said  that cost effective and transparent mechanisms were a  successful way of addressing adverse impacts. The US  supported Australia, but said that in the interest of a  successful outcome at COP-6, the text should focus only on  those issues addressed in Article 3.14.

At the joint SBI/SBSTA meeting on Friday, September 15,  delegates adopted draft conclusions (FCCC/SB/2000/CRP.11).  Uganda, on behalf of the LDCs, requested inclusion of a  fourth paragraph requesting the Secretariat to organize a  workshop to identify the specific needs of LDCs related to,  inter alia, capacity building and adaptation. SBI Chair  Ashe noted this request. Executive Secretary Michael Zammit  Cutajar welcomed the emergence of this group. In the draft  conclusions on both Implementation of FCCC Article 4.8 and  4.9 and Protocol Articles 2.3 and 3.14, the subsidiary  bodies, inter alia:agree to forward the text (FCCC/SB/2000/CRP.11/Add.1)  to the second part of the thirteenth sessions for further  consideration; invite the Chairs to convene inter-sessional  consultations on these items; and decide to resume negotiations on the two agenda items  based on the text at the second part of the thirteenth  sessions.

## COMPLIANCE

Delegates considered procedures and mechanisms relating to  a compliance system under the Protocol in informal meetings  during the pre-sessional week, in a joint SBI/SBSTA meeting  on Friday, 15 September, and in the Joint Working Group on  Compliance (JWG) from 11-15 September. These meetings were  co-chaired by Harald Dovland (Norway) and Neroni Slade  (Samoa). During the informal week, Parties considered the  proposals from the Co-Chairs of the Joint Working Group  under the Kyoto Protocol (FCCC/SB/2000/7). Based on Parties  input, a text by the Co-Chairs of the Joint Working Group  on Compliance (FCCC/SB/2000/CRP.7) was drafted and  distributed on Monday, 11 September. During the first half  of SB-13, delegates met four times to discuss the text,  offer comments and indicate areas where their submissions  had not been reflected. As a result of their deliberations,  a revised text (FCCC/SB/2000/CRP.10/Add.1) was produced and  adopted by the joint SBI/SBSTA session on Friday, 15  September as a basis for further negotiation at COP-6.

### GENERAL PROVISIONS

Parties considered general provisions  within the Co-Chairs' proposals on Thursday, 14 September.  With respect to the scope of application, Saudi Arabia,  opposed by Samoa and Peru suggested that the compliance  system apply to all commitments - not just those  'contained' in, but also those 'referred to' in the  Protocol. Samoa argued that this was not justified by the  BAPA and added that the compliance procedure under the  Protocol could not address obligations in the FCCC.

### ESTABLISHMENT AND STRUCTURE

Parties discussed  establishment and structure of the compliance body, as  contained in the Co-Chairs' proposals, on Tuesday and  Wednesday, 5-6 September, and as contained in the Co- Chairs' text on Tuesday, 12 September. The EU expressed its  preference for: one body with two branches; a powerful  Chair; enforcement measures applying only to Annex I  countries; and facilitative measures applying to the  obligations of all Parties. South Africa, on behalf of the  G-77/China, noted preference for one body with two branches  subject to certain conditions, including that the  enforcement branch apply only to Annex I countries, and the  composition of both branches reflect equitable geographic  distribution. With the US, she underlined the need for  certainty and due process, and, with the Russian  Federation, opposed the EU proposal for a powerful Chair.  The US accepted the proposed structure of one body with two  branches and supported focus on commitments rather than on  Parties. Switzerland proposed a single body performing both  functions, but with a screening panel that would determine  the procedure to be followed in each case. The Russian  Federation and Japan, opposed by Samoa, preferred  consecutive rather than parallel functions, with the  facilitative stage preceding enforcement.

On the respective mandates of the facilitation and  enforcement branches of the compliance body, the G-77/China  expressed preference for, inter alia: delineating mandates  clearly; implementing the principle of comprehensiveness;  limiting the enforcement branch's mandate to Annex I  Parties; and ensuring that the enforcement branch only  address issues following specific requests. The EU  preferred the branches to have different expertise  corresponding to their functions - a technical team for  facilitation and a legal team for enforcement. China, Saudi  Arabia, Japan, the Russian Federation, Brazil and  Switzerland opposed this division. Australia, the US and  New Zealand supported legal expertise for the enforcement  branch, but with access to technical expertise, when  required. The US, with Canada, Australia and New Zealand,  suggested that where members from one branch participate in  the work of the other, it be on a non-voting basis. The US  suggested that the enforcement branch's mandate include,  inter alia: determining non-compliance with Protocol  Article 3.1 (commitments); determining failure to meet  eligibility requirements for mechanisms; and applying  outcomes that have been agreed in advance, with discretion  regarding submission of issues to the facilitation branch.  China, with Brazil, Chile, Saudi Arabia, Qatar and  Venezuela, and opposed by Australia, Canada, Japan, the US  and New Zealand, argued that the mandate of the enforcement  body should include Protocol Articles 2.3 and 3.14 (adverse  effects). Samoa said Article 3.14 should be addressed  within a strengthened facilitative process. Saudi Arabia,  with the Russian Federation and Venezuela, but opposed by  Canada, Australia and New Zealand, supported text  referencing Protocol Article 18 (non-compliance) in the  establishment of the compliance committee. The EU, with  Japan, Canada, New Zealand, Australia and the US,  recommended that the options on the compliance committee's  composition be kept open. With Japan and Canada, she said  the enforcement branch should be able to impose  facilitative consequences.

### PROCEDURES

Parties discussed procedures of the compliance  body in the context of the Co-Chairs' proposals on Thursday  and Friday, 7-8 September, and in the context of the Co- Chairs' text on Wednesday, 13 September. On the submission  of questions to the compliance body, the G-77/China said  questions of compliance could be raised by a Party with  respect to itself or another Party. Australia, opposed by  Samoa, said that a Party should not be able to raise  questions with respect to another Party. The US said a  Party should be able to refer questions with respect to  another Party's compliance only to the facilitation branch.  The G-77/China, opposed by New Zealand, supported a role  for the COP/MOP. The EU, opposed by China, supported a role  for the Secretariat.

On the preliminary examination of questions, the G-77/China  said functions at this stage should include ensuring that  the question is supported by sufficient information and is  not de minimis, and directing the case to a particular  branch. She said this task should be undertaken by a  plenary of the compliance committee. The UK said the  screening process should simply be an organizational stage  to ensure that the relevant branch receives the case. He  suggested creating a bureau of the compliance committee  consisting of two members, representing the enforcement and  facilitative branches, to perform this function. The  Russian Federation suggested that all questions go  automatically to the facilitation branch. The US said there  should be two functions, one related to allocation and the  other to substance. The allocation function would be  performed by a bureau of the compliance institution, and  the substantive screening, which would be necessary only  for cases referred to the enforcement branch, would be  undertaken by the enforcement branch.

With respect to the procedures for further handling of  questions, the G-77/China said procedures relating to  decision-making, participation, conflict of interest and  information sources should be equally applicable to both  branches. The US suggested having two separate and complete  procedures. Samoa and the US said the enforcement branch  could address specific provisions and the facilitation  branch could have broad jurisdiction. Brazil, opposed by  Australia and the Russian Federation, supported  distinguishing between facilitation available to Annex I  and non-Annex I Parties.

On appeals, the EU, Micronesia and Samoa, opposed by New  Zealand, doubted their necessity, since it would delay the  process and merely afford Parties the opportunity to have  their case heard twice. The US, while retaining the 'no  appeal' option, said any appeal body should be limited to  overriding decisions. Saudi Arabia suggested that the  COP/MOP be the appeals body.

### CONSEQUENCES

Parties discussed outcomes and consequences  of non-compliance within the context of the Co-Chairs'  proposals on Saturday, 9 September, and Thursday, 14  September. The G-77/China, opposed by the US, New Zealand  and Australia, suggested differentiating between Annex I  and non-Annex I Parties. The EU emphasized the role of P&Ms  in compliance action plans and, opposed by Australia and  Chile, advocated an open-ended list of facilitation  consequences. The US said the facilitation branch should  not apply mandatory outcomes. The Russian Federation  highlighted concerns relating to, inter alia: publication  of potential non-compliance; initiation by the facilitation  branch of the enforcement procedure; and the calculation of  excess tonnes to be deducted from a Party's assigned  amount. Switzerland, of behalf of the Environmental  Integrity Group, supported the following consequences: a  compliance action plan, restrictions on the use of  mechanisms, and a compliance fund. Australia opposed  financial penalties and the issuing of cautions. With the  Russian Federation, and opposed by Samoa, Palau, Micronesia  and Brazil, she argued against binding consequences.

### OTHER PROVISIONS

Parties considered adoption in the  context of the Co-Chairs' proposals on Saturday, 9  September, and Thursday, 14 September. The US outlined  three options: the COP recommends to the COP/MOP that the  attached decision be adopted; the COP recommends to the  COP/MOP that the attached decision be included in the  decision on the second commitment period; or the COP adopts  a legal instrument that enters into force at the same time  as the Protocol. The EU presented two options: adoption of  a decision by COP-6 that would have immediate interim  effect, accompanied by a recommendation to COP/MOP-1 to  adopt an identical instrument; or adoption of a legal  instrument that would enter into force at the same time as  the Protocol. Parties supported different options based on  their positions on the need for binding consequences.

### REPORT OF THE JOINT WORKING GROUP

On Friday, 15 September,  the JWG considered and accepted the report on its work  during SB-13. The report (FCCC/SB/2000/CRP.10) was adopted  by the joint SBI/SBSTA on Friday, 15 September. In its  report, the JWG, inter alia, requests the Co-Chairs to  further develop the text on compliance  (FCCC/SB/2000/CRP.10/Add.1) to serve as a basis for  negotiations, along with inputs from Parties, at the second  part of SB-13.

## ACTIVITIES IMPLEMENTED JOINTLY

At the SBSTA-13 Plenary on Monday, 11 September, the  Secretariat presented a report on activities implemented  jointly (AIJ) under the pilot phase indicating the need  for, inter alia, better regional and technical distribution  of projects, improved quality of reporting, and  strengthened capacity in host countries. It noted that a  revised uniform reporting format was available. China, with  Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Tunisia, highlighted the need to  extend the pilot phase and ensure greater geographic  balance in projects. With the US and Canada, he suggested  that the revised uniform reporting format be discussed at  SBSTA-14. Hungary suggested that the AIJ experience should  be used to implement JI, and the EU said it could be used  to elaborate the CDM Reference Manual. She added that  crediting for projects should only be possible after the  Protocol comes into effect.

On Friday, 15 September, the SBI/SBSTA adopted a decision  (FCCC/SBI/2000/L.2) deferring further discussion on AIJ and  the revised uniform reporting format to SBSTA-14.

## MECHANISMS

Delegates discussed issues and heard presentations on the  Protocol mechanisms in workshops during the pre-sessional  week, at a joint SBI/SBSTA session on Monday, 11 September,  and in subsequent contact group meetings. Based on the  discussions and on written submissions on the Chairs'  consolidated text on principles, modalities, rules and  guidelines on mechanisms (FCCC/SB/2000/4), a revised  consolidated text was drafted and distributed in four  volumes on Friday, 15 September (FCCC/SB/CRP.14/Add.1 -  Volumes 1-4).

### CLEAN DEVELOPMENT MECHANISM

On Monday, 4 September, the  Secretariat gave a presentation on the proposed CDM  Reference Manual and on accreditation. Saudi Arabia  highlighted the political nature of CDM-related decisions,  urged that decisions on baselines be undertaken by the  COP/MOP, and expressed reservations about the need for a  Reference Manual. Brazil, with Colombia, South Africa,  China and Morocco, said decisions on baselines should be  taken by a politically appointed body, such as the  Executive Board (EB). China, with the US, expressed  preference for a single worldwide accreditation body. The  Republic of Korea highlighted additionality and questioned  whether the Manual would be a compilation of COP/MOP and EB  decisions, or would include technical advice. The US  supported the Manual serving as a repository of decisions,  while the EU urged that it be of a technical nature. The EU  suggested that the role of the EB lies in the accreditation  and random checking of Operational Entities. The  Philippines expressed concern at agreeing on the form of  the Manual before agreeing on the substance of its content.  She sought clarity on the certification of project  activities and emissions reduction.

On Tuesday, 5 September, Chair Kok Kee Chow (Malaysia) gave  a presentation on the institutional issues relating to the  CDM. On the role of the COP/MOP, South Africa, supported by  Samoa, identified an overlap in the functions assigned to  the COP/MOP, the EB and the compliance body. Samoa,  supported by the EU, reminded Parties of the agreement at  Kyoto that the COP/MOP would not deal with routine CDM  concerns. With the US, she stressed the need for technical  expertise in the EB. The EU envisaged a variety of  functions for the EB, including: issuing Certified Emission  Reductions (CERs); registering projects; and addressing  issues related to accreditation of Operational Entities.

Discussion on text on the CDM in the draft consolidated  text commenced on Saturday, 9 September. Australia, Canada,  Japan, and Norway underlined the need for a prompt start.  Saudi Arabia highlighted legal difficulties with a prompt  start, and suggested expanding the AIJ pilot phase to  accommodate this. The EU and Switzerland said the CDM  should commence immediately after COP-6 on a permanent  rather than interim basis. The Africa Group proposed a  stand-alone decision on interim arrangements. Parties  differed on the use of a positive list of CDM projects.

On Tuesday, 12 September, delegates reviewed the draft  decision on the CDM. Japan said any requirements on  financial additionality should not result in diversion of  ODA. The US emphasized that revisions to the modalities,  procedures and guidelines be made by consensus. The G-77/China highlighted the need to distinguish between  additionality and baselines, and emphasized reference to  funding additionality. The EU, opposed by the G-77/China,  proposed that the COP invite the IPCC to prepare guidelines  for baselines. On the COP/MOP rules, Norway and the US  emphasized that institutional responsibilities be part of  the COP-6 decision. On the EB, Norway, Canada, Japan and  the US, opposed by the G-77/China, highlighted a role for  the EB in determining new baseline and monitoring  methodologies. On participation, Parties disagreed on the  need for text relating to: projects proposed, developed,  financed and implemented by non-Annex I countries;  conditions on non-Annex I participation such as the  fulfillment of commitments under FCCC Article 12  (communication of information); and certain eligibility  criteria for transfers and acquisitions under Protocol  Article 3 (commitments).

On Wednesday, 13 September, delegates considered the text  on modalities and procedures for a CDM. Japan, Honduras and  several Latin American Parties, opposed by Tuvalu, proposed  deleting the list of requirements for project activities.  The Africa Group urged equitable geographic distribution of  CDM projects. Canada highlighted difficulties in  implementing various forms of additionality other than  environmental additionality.

On the linkage between CDM and LULUCF, Brazil, with the G-77/China, argued that CDM discussions be contingent on  decisions in the LULUCF contact group, and objected to a  proposed presentation by the Secretariat on this issue, and  to a question-and-answer session by the Chair. Australia,  the US, Japan, Switzerland, and New Zealand expressed  concern with this objection. This issue was also addressed  on Thursday, 14 September, in a separate meeting under the  LULUCF Group (see section on LULUCF).

### EMISSIONS TRADING

On Wednesday, 6 September, the  Secretariat gave a presentation on liability options for  emissions trading. The US, New Zealand, Canada and  Australia stressed the role of the private sector and the  advantages of issuer liability. Switzerland highlighted  concerns with overselling, cautioned against relying solely  on seller liability, and emphasized support for 'units in  surplus to plan.' The EU presented an option representing a  mix of shared and acquiring party liability. The G-77/China  supported surplus units, and emphasized the importance of  nature and scope, supplementarity, and the precautionary  approach.

Parties continued deliberations on the consolidated text on  Thursday, 14 September. On the draft decision, the EU,  Japan and Norway questioned the need for text on  principles. The G-77/China, with Brazil, Samoa and Jamaica,  and opposed by the US and Canada, said assigned amounts  (AAs) were fixed. Chair Chow gave a presentation on AAs.  Samoa questioned whether parts of AAs (PAAs) could be held  by allocated legal entities or only by sovereign States,  and suggested that the issue of legal entities  participating in emissions trading be addressed in the  appendix on domestic systems. She added that if legal  entities were allowed to participate, the process must be  transparent. On the modalities of operation, the G-77/China, opposed by Canada, questioned whether Parties  could transfer PAAs that remained unused because of factors  other than P&Ms, such as economic recession. Canada,  opposed by the G-77/China and EU, suggested withdrawing the  appendix on elaborating guidelines on national systems  relating to AA units and/or PAAs. On the share of proceeds,  the US proposed that the group on guidelines address this.

### JOINT IMPLEMENTATION

On Thursday, 7 September, Parties  reviewed the draft decision on guidelines for  implementation of Protocol Article 6 (JI). AOSIS, opposed  by Norway, Poland and Canada, proposed removing reference  to these being guidelines. Parties were unable to agree on  whether to retain text relating to equity,  comprehensiveness, transparency, climate change  effectiveness, fungibility, and sharing of proceeds.

Parties continued discussions on Friday, 8 September. On  the COP/MOP, Japan, Canada, the US and Poland reiterated  preference for existing Article 6 provisions. The G-77/China urged the same rigor for JI as for CDM. On  participation, the EU referred to its two-track approach,  which relates to the transfer of emission reduction units,  in terms of which Parties complying with a set of  identified preconditions may follow a more simplified  procedure for transfer. The US and Norway expressed  interest in the proposal, with caveats. On monitoring, the  EU, supported by several Annex I countries, proposed an  option consistent with its two-track approach. Saudi  Arabia, supported by Canada, bracketed reference to the CDM  Reference Manual. On supplementarity, the EU, G-77/China  and Hungary emphasized domestic action as the primary means  to fulfill commitments. Saudi Arabia, with the Africa  Group, suggested a cap of 25-30%. The EU elaborated on two  formulae: for a ceiling on net transfers and for a ceiling  on net acquisitions. The US and Canada emphasized concerns  with quantitative caps.

### CONCLUSIONS ON MECHANISMS

On Friday, 15 September, the  SBI/SBSTA adopted draft conclusions on mechanisms  (FCCC/SB/2000/CRP.14). In these conclusions, the SBI/SBSTA:  notes the progress made in implementing the work programme  on mechanisms; agrees to forward to the second part of  SBSTA the revised consolidated text; and invites the Chairs  of the subsidiary bodies to further consolidate the text,  in consultation with Parties. Saudi Arabia said it was  willing to accept the conclusions on the understanding that  further consolidation will not eliminate any proposals by  Parties. He said that the Parties need to decide themselves  whether or not to retain their proposals. The G-77/China  urged that the consultations with the Parties be undertaken  in a transparent manner, and said consolidation of the text  implies further refinement without any of the proposals  being discounted in any manner.

## CAPACITY BUILDING

This issue was considered in informal meetings from 4-9  September and subsequently by the SBI on 12 September. A  contact group, co-chaired by SBI Chair Ashe and Jukka  Uosukainen (Finland) met from 11-15 September.

### CLIMATE DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVE (CDI)

On 4 September,  delegates convened in regional group meetings to hear  presentations and discuss conclusions on the CDI regional  reviews. The group on Small Island Developing States  considered ways to advance the process, noting that interim  actions could be taken at the regional level to address  immediate needs already identified. The Asia-Pacific  meeting discussed the report's focus on the need to, inter  alia: strengthen existing networks of regional and national  experts and institutions offering training; consider the  specific social and cultural context in technology  transfer; and ensure that capacity development is country- driven. Participants in the African meeting expressed  concern with the process of developing the regional  reviews, and called for more time to consider the report.  The Eastern Europe and Central Asia group highlighted,  inter alia, a short-term project-based and long-term  systematic approach to capacity building, and regional  diversity. Participants in the Latin America and Caribbean  Group emphasized the lack of negotiating capacity, which is  affected by rapid rotation of diplomatic staff, and the  need for financial resources for countries to manage their  own capacity-building priorities.

On Wednesday, 6 September, delegates discussed the CDI and  its next phase with GEF and UNDP representatives. Delegates  discussed the source of funding for the GEF's CDI. They  questioned its value as a separate initiative, noting that  much of what had been raised through this process had been  previously elaborated in COP decisions.

ECONOMIES IN TRANSITION (EITs): Informal meetings on  capacity building in EITs were held from Wednesday, 6  September, to Thursday, 14 September. Delegates discussed a  draft framework for capacity building in countries with  EITs. During the discussion, the US, with Hungary,  suggested that capacity building focus on implementation of  the FCCC and Protocol, rather than sustainable development.  Clarity was sought on references to timeframes and  benchmarks, and whether support for technologies  constituted capacity building.

On implementation, several Parties emphasized the need for  EITs to provide an enabling environment. They highlighted  the need for, inter alia: the framework to provide a clear  basis for action; a results-based approach to capacity  building to ensure its effectiveness; consideration of past  and present activities; elaboration of mutual  responsibilities; and consistency between any additional  reporting obligations with the guidelines of national  communications. On 11 September, Slovenia introduced a  proposal for a draft decision, which calls for a prompt  start to capacity building in EITs, and a COP decision to  initiate the creation of the framework for capacity  building.

On 14 September, delegates considered a revised draft of  the text. Among the issues raised in discussing the draft  framework was the need to elaborate one formulation  regarding implementation of the FCCC and Protocol and to  clarify how information will be provided to enable the COP  to review progress in implementing the framework. Following  extensive discussions, a number of paragraphs in the draft  framework were bracketed, including several references to  the Protocol.

On Friday, 15 September, delegates adopted the conclusions  of the joint SBI/SBTSA session, which agree to further  consider, at the second part of SB-13 in November, the  proposed draft decision on capacity building in economies  in transition (FCCC/SB/2000/CRP.13/Add.2) with a view to  recommending a decision for COP-6 adoption.

The proposed draft decision for capacity building in EITs  calls on the COP to, inter alia:adopt the framework with immediate effect; invite Annex II Parties and EITs to provide  information to enable the COP and its subsidiary bodies to  monitor progress in the implementation of the framework; urge Annex II Parties through the multilateral  agencies, including the GEF CDI, and other bilateral  agencies and the private sector, to ensure financial  resources and technical support required for the  implementation of the framework; and further urge multilateral and bilateral agencies to  coordinate in providing streamlined and expedited  approaches to financing and supporting the implementation  of the capacity-building framework.

### DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

Participants began consideration of  draft text on capacity building in developing countries on  Thursday, 7 September. They subsequently considered the  revised draft briefly on 14 September and informally on 15  September.

In discussing the draft framework, delegates highlighted  the need to, inter alia: ensure consistency with the  capacity building aspects of other discussions on  technology transfer and adaptation; draw lessons from  existing activities; establish an appropriate enabling  environment for capacity building; mobilize and strengthen  existing regional and sub-regional institutions; provide  good guidance to the GEF; and take into account past  actions and develop coherence with present activities in  order to define those that will support FCCC  implementation. AOSIS said capacity building was a dynamic  and iterative process that would be augmented by  experiences from implementing other aspects of the FCCC.  She said the needs assessment should not be used as an  excuse to delay action on those needs that have already  been identified. A proposal for a draft decision on  capacity building by the G-77/China was not discussed in  the contact group due to time limitations.

On Friday, 15 September, delegates adopted the conclusions  of the joint SBI/SBTSA session, which agree to further  consider, at the second part of SB-13 in November, the  proposed draft decision on capacity building in developing  countries (FCCC/SB/2000/CRP.13/Add.1) with a view to  recommending a decision for COP-6 adoption.

Bracketed text in the draft decision for capacity building  in developing countries include paragraphs calling on the  COP to:decide that the framework shall guide all capacity  building activities related to the implementation of the  Convention and the Kyoto Protocol; or decide to give  immediate effect to the implementation of the framework in  order to assist developing countries to implement the  Convention; request the GEF to provide financing to implement  their capacity building activities under each area of the  Convention and include in its report to the COP at each  session, information on the financing and implementation of  capacity building activities conducted under the framework; decide to review the progress in implementing the  decision at each session; and decide to establish a special LDC fund to support and  promote effective implementation of the Convention and  Kyoto Protocol, and the Convention processes within the  time frame specified in the framework.

## CLOSING SBI/SBSTA PLENARY

SBI Chair Ashe opened the final joint SBI/SBSTA meeting on  Friday evening, 15 September. Parties expressed their  appreciation to the French Government and the city of Lyon  for hosting SB-13.

Nigeria, on behalf of the G-77/China, expressed  disappointment that more progress had not been achieved at  this critical session in Lyon. He asked whether developed  countries intended to accommodate the priorities of  developing countries. He called for transparency in  negotiations, and insisted that each Party at COP-6 be  involved in the decision-making process.

Vanuatu, speaking for the LDCs, noted that this group had  only established itself recently. He called on all  developed countries to implement their FCCC obligations,  and requested that a workshop be organized for LDCs to  focus on key issues in the lead-up to COP-6. In response,  FCCC Executive Secretary Cutajar said that funding was  available to comply with this request, although the issue  of timing would have to be addressed. He suggested that the  workshop either take place in October or immediately prior  to COP-6. He also drew delegates' attention to the fact  that there had been a number of recent ratifications of the  Kyoto Protocol, meaning more than half of the 55 countries  required to ratify in order for the Protocol to enter into  force had now done so. Saudi Arabia and Brazil expressed  support for recognizing the needs and situations of LDCs.

The Union of Industrial and Employers' Confederations of  Europe (UNICE), speaking on behalf of the business  community, highlighted that actions taken by business and  industry would be fundamental to Parties achieving the  commitments agreed to in Kyoto. Regarding the mechanisms,  he suggested: keeping the process and procedures for the  project-based mechanisms clear and concise; minimizing  transaction costs; not limiting the eligibility and use of  any technologies in implementing the Protocol; and ensuring  there are no limits, ceiling or share of the proceeds type  fees apart from in the CDM. He expressed concern at the  lengthy texts currently before SB-13 that contained many  unresolved issues, and at the significant work required for  a successful outcome for COP-6.

The Indigenous Peoples' Group noted that there are 350-400  million who identify themselves as indigenous peoples. He  expressed opposition to the use of sinks in the CDM,  suggesting it would result in a violation of the rights of  indigenous peoples. He said negotiations must involve full  participation of indigenous peoples.

Following these statements, the Secretariat announced  informal consultations during the intersessional period  prior to COP-6 relating to:Protocol Articles 5, 7 and 8 (6-8 October, Bonn); LULUCF (9-11 October, Viterbo, Italy); compliance (12-14 October, New Delhi); mechanisms (16-18 October, New Delhi); and, adverse effects (tentatively scheduled for 19-22  October, Geneva).

SBI Chair Ashe noted that participants had worked very  hard, narrowing differences and producing negotiating texts  on most issues that he hoped would pave the way for a set  of decisions at COP-6. However, he also drew attention to  the considerable amount of work remaining in the lead-up to  COP-6, and at COP-6 itself. He hoped that results achieved  in November would trigger ratification of the Protocol and  further strengthen implementation of the FCCC. He informed  delegates that SB-13 would resume in The Hague, and  suspended the meeting at 10:45 pm.

# A BRIEF ANALYSIS OF SB-13

## SB-13: HAVE WE TRAVELLED FAR ENOUGH?

At the end of two weeks of intense deliberations, delegates  and observers may have good cause to feel concerned.  Political positions on the key issues remain entrenched,  with little indication of willingness to compromise or move  forward. Some might argue that this was never the meeting's  aim, suggesting that its core purpose was to develop  negotiating text and narrow differences on technical  matters. But even on this more limited objective, progress  was patchy. While such text emerged on the key elements of  the BAPA - mechanisms, compliance, adverse effects,  technology transfer, LULUCF and policies and measures - all  of these documents remain riddled with brackets. In some  cases negotiations almost ground to a halt, indicating an  apparent unwillingness of Parties to make even relatively  minor concessions. With only eight weeks remaining, and  with many technical and political questions needing to be  resolved, observers are beginning to question whether COP-6  will succeed.

The timing and location of the meeting was ironic. While  French Prime Minister Jospin's presence at SB-13 suggested  some political commitment to making progress on climate  change, his concessions in lowering taxes in response to  the French fuel protests, which coincided with this  meeting, highlight the political difficulties in  implementing effective climate policies.

## MECHANISMS - RUNNING OUT OF GAS?

Progress on mechanisms was disappointing. Parties arrived  at SB-13 with a 125-page text, and departed with a 200-page  text and an assurance that they will be able to make  further submissions prior to COP-6. The battle lines remain  drawn on issues such as 'supplementarity,' an issue that  has plagued the mechanisms discussions since their  inception. While the EU and G-77/China are in favor of  quantitative caps and domestic action, the Umbrella Group  (an informal alliance of like-minded developed countries,  including Australia, Canada, Japan and the US) is against  this, citing the power of the market to determine the  appropriate balance. In a similar vein, the role of legal  entities in emissions trading, and the need to build in  appropriate safeguards to ensure proper accounting, has  come in for heated debate.

One particularly crucial area of disagreement and  controversy, however, remains the issue of including sinks  in the CDM. There is little movement on this issue, whether  between or within negotiating groups or even within the NGO  community. Some Parties, including the EU, Tuvalu, Samoa,  China and Jamaica, are in favor of excluding sinks from the  CDM. The concerns about uncertainty, leakage and  non-permanence, if realized, could contribute to making a  mockery of the Kyoto targets, yet sinks could offer the  potential for contribution to sustainable development in  some developing countries, while focusing efforts on carbon  sequestration. The outcome at COP-6 on this issue will  largely depend on the political initiative taken at the  Ministerial consultations slated for early October, where  LULUCF in general, particularly sinks under the CDM, is  expected to be at the top of the agenda.

## CRUISING ON COMPLIANCE

The Joint Working Group on Compliance made steady progress,  producing a streamlined text for further negotiation, and  winning the Group kudos for its work. However, fundamental  issues remain unresolved. It remains unclear whether the  compliance system will apply only to Protocol commitments  or also to commitments 'referred to' in the Protocol  (namely FCCC commitments), whether the compliance system  can apply to outcomes with binding consequences, and  whether the compliance committee will have equal  representation from the five UN regional groups or  predominantly from Annex I countries. The work in the  compliance group is intricately linked both to the work in  the mechanisms group and to the group on Articles 5,7 and  8. The stronger the compliance system, the more ambiguous  the provisions relating to the mechanisms are likely to be,  and vice versa. The work of the Article 5,7 and 8 group  feeds into the compliance group. While most of the  technical issues are easy to settle, certain issues such as  those relating to the determination of the entity charged  with identifying first order compliance problems and the  composition of Expert Review Teams are seen as more  controversial. No decisions will be taken in any one of  these groups without clear reference, both technical and  political, to the work of the other groups.

## FUELING THE DEBATE ON LULUCF

This group produced a slim Co-Chairs' text on elements  under Article 3.3 (afforestation, reforestation and  deforestation) and 3.4 (additional activities) setting out  the choices Parties will have to make at COP-6. Once again,  crucial issues are yet to be resolved, including those  regarding accounting systems. Views range from those of the  G-77/China and the Environmental Integrity Group, which are  opposed to crediting natural uptake of carbon in  terrestrial systems and corresponding smaller actual  emissions cuts in Annex I countries, to those of Japan,  which favor factoring in such effects. The integrity of the  Protocol targets hinge on which and how much of the  additional activities under Article 3.4 will be eligible,  and how and if such activities are to be phased-in or  discounted for.

## POLICIES AND MEASURES - SPLUTTERING TO A HALT

This is a key issue for the EU, which at SB-13 urged the  establishment of a 'consultative process' to promote  information exchange and experience on P&Ms, facilitate  cooperation between Parties, and contribute to the  assessment of demonstrable progress. By the end of the  second week, a draft decision supportive of its stance had  been weakened and heavily bracketed by the Umbrella Group  and Saudi Arabia, the former by deleting any meaningful  reference to demonstrable progress, and bracketing the list  of measures aimed at improving the transparency,  effectiveness and comparability of P&Ms, and the latter by  insisting on a role for OPEC regarding P&Ms. The EU again  appeared to be unable to successfully defend its position,  leading one observer to comment that 'what was once a  cornerstone in the climate negotiations has becomes a  symbol of the crisis in international cooperation on  climate change.' According to some, the apparent inability  of the EU to negotiate effectively in this sphere means  that this issue may be the only one that is easily resolved  at COP-6.

## WAITING IN LINE - 'DEVELOPING COUNTRY ISSUES'

Most observers believe that an effective outcome at COP-6  will lie in the resolution of what they describe as  'developing country issues'- adaptation, capacity building  and technology transfer. As key elements of a package deal,  satisfactory movement on these issues could render  developing countries amenable to striking deals elsewhere.

Texts were produced on technology transfer and capacity  building, but they are riddled with brackets. Some  observers had hoped for a resolution on capacity building  at SB-13 as a confidence-building measure paving the way  for a constructive atmosphere at COP-6. However, this was  not to be. Several Annex I countries continued their focus,  both in capacity building and technology transfer, on  'needs assessment,' which appeared to tip the balance of  responsibility to developing countries. The G-77/China lost  its patience, insisting that the LDCs and AOSIS had  identified their needs and urged immediate action, rather  than repeat assessments and reviews that will continue to  delay implementation.

The GEF's performance in serving the Conference of the  Parties also provoked criticism. The G-77/China suggested  that the GEF had exceeded its mandate as its new Capacity  Development Initiative had not sought guidance from the COP  and was yet another solution 'imposed' on developing  countries. Saudi Arabia's insistence on creating a new fund  with what many perceived as 'unreasonably high' designated  sums of money further stalled constructive dialogue.  Needless to say this was met with a frosty reception from  developed countries.

As with capacity building and technology transfer, the  substantive movement on adverse effects was minimal. The  entire negotiating text remains bracketed. Disagreement  focused mainly on issues of funding. Although some oil  exporting countries continue to push hard for  'compensation' for the impacts of response measures, this  remains fundamentally unacceptable to Annex I Parties, even  though they, in principle, support adaptation as an  important element of the FCCC process. However, even  relatively less controversial developing-country requests  for the establishment of national and regional observation  and research centers and programmes on climate change, as  well as a fund for climate-related disaster relief, were  not met with encouraging responses from the Annex I  Parties.

## TAXING TIMES ON THE ROAD TO COP-6

SB-12 and 13 demonstrated Parties' willingness to make some  progress on technical issues, such as guidelines under  Articles 5, 7 and 8, and set the stage for the intense  negotiations expected at COP-6. The question remains, is  this progress sufficient? The likely impact of new negotiating groups at COP-6 is  unclear. The establishment of the LDC Group indicates that  LDC interests are not been adequately reflected, while the  announcement of the Environmental Integrity Group (Mexico,  Republic of Korea and Switzerland) reflects their sense of  exclusion during 11th hour negotiations at previous COPs.  While this splintering of traditional negotiating groups  may help to raise the profile of a wider range of interests  and generate a sense of inclusiveness and transparency,  there is also the risk that it may further complicate the  negotiating process.

The anticipated visibility of environmental NGOs at The  Hague, and their pressure to generate a positive outcome by  shaming Parties to produce results, is counterbalanced by  the recent evident unwillingness of the public to reduce  their addiction to fossil fuels.

With so many issues still to be resolved, much rests on the  shoulders of the incoming President of COP-6, Jan Pronk  (Dutch Minister of Spatial Planning and the Environment).  Boasting a background in international development issues,  commentators suggest this may help him bridge the North- South divide and broker a deal in the days to come. The  hectic schedule of consultations and diplomacy in coming  weeks could generate the necessary momentum for a strong  outcome at COP-6. But with so many unresolved issues and  entrenched positions, the outcome is now anybody's guess.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR BEFORE COP-6

Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry - the road to COP-6:  This meeting will be held in Joensuu, Finland, from 25-28  September 2000. Specific themes will include: carbon  accounting rules, baselines and additionality; the  selection of forestry and land-use activities under Article  3.4; and other issues relevant to COP-6. For more  information, contact: Kimberly Robertson, Institute of  Energy Research, Austria; tel: +43-316-876-1330; fax: +43- 316-876-1320; e-mail: kimberly.robertson@joanneum.ac.at;  Internet: http://www.joanneum.ac.at/iea-bioenergy-task25/ National Communications Support Programme Workshops for  non-Annex I Parties to the FCCC: Launched by UNDP and UNEP  in cooperation with the FCCC Secretariat, this programme  provides technical support for the preparation of initial  national communications under the FCCC. Four regional  workshops remain under the 2000 work programme:Asian Regional Workshop (26-29 September in Kuala  Lumpur, Malaysia); Europe and CIS Regional Workshop (10-12 October,  Yerevan, Armenia); Arab States Regional Workshop (5-7 November, Cairo,  Egypt); and South American Regional Workshop (12-14 December,  Asunción, Paraguay).

For more information, contact: Rebecca Carman, National  Communications Support Programme, UNDP-GEF, New York; tel:  +1-212-906-6928; fax: +1-212-906-6568; e-mail:  rebecca.carman@undp.org; Internet: www.undp.org/cc/

### FCCC INFORMAL CONSULTATIONS

The FCCC Secretariat has  announced informal consultations during the intersessional  period relating to:Protocol Articles 5, 7 and 8 (6-8 October, Bonn); LULUCF (9-11 October, Viterbo, Italy); compliance (12-14 October, New Delhi); mechanisms (16-18 October, New Delhi); and, adverse effects (tentatively scheduled for 19-22  October, Geneva).

For more information, contact: the FCCC Secretariat; tel:  +49-228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail:  secretariat@unfccc.int; Internet: http://www.unfccc.int/

### EARTH TECHNOLOGIES FORUM

This meeting, organized by the  Alliance for Responsible Atmospheric Policy, will be held  in Washington, DC, from 30 October - 1 November 2000. Both  ozone and climate change issues will be discussed. For more  information, contact: Alliance for Responsible Atmospheric  Policy: tel: +1-703-243-0344; Internet:  http://www.earthforum.com/

### NATIONAL AND REGIONAL CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACT ASSESSMENTS IN  THE FORESTRY SECTOR

This meeting will be held in Potsdam,  Germany, from 10-13 November 2000. For more information,  contact: Marcus Lindner, Potsdam Institute for Climate  Impact Research, Telegrafenberg, P.O. Box 601203, D-14412  Potsdam, Germany; tel: +49-331-288 2677; fax: +49-331-288- 2695; e-mail: lindner@pik-potsdam.de; Internet:  http://www.pik-potsdam.de/welcome.html

### SIXTH CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE FRAMEWORK CONVENTION  ON CLIMATE CHANGE

FCCC COP-6 will be held in The Hague,  the Netherlands, from 13-24 November 2000. For more  information, contact: the FCCC Secretariat; tel: +49-228- 815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail:  secretariat@unfccc.int; Internet: http://www.unfccc.int/