---
title: "SUMMARY OF THE TENTH SESSION OF THE FCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES: 31 MAY – 11 JUNE 1999"
id: enb12110e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12110e
date: 1999-06-11
abstract: "The subsidiary bodies to the UN Framework Convention on Climate  Change (FCCC) held their tenth sessions at the Maritim Hotel in  Bonn, Germany, from 31 May - 11 June 1999, and began the process  of fulfilling the Buenos Aires Plan of Action, which was adopted  at the Fourth Conference of the Parties (COP-4) in November  1998. Under the Plan of Action, Parties set a two-year deadline  for strengthening implementation of the FCCC and preparing for  the future entry into force of the Kyoto Protocol. The  Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA)  considered topics such as Annex I communications, methodological  issues and the development and transfer of technology. The  Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) discussed, inter alia,  administrative and financial matters and non-Annex I  communications. SBI and SBSTA jointly considered the mechanisms  of the Kyoto Protocol, activities implemented jointly and  compliance."
---

After a slow start, work at the subsidiary bodies picked up  during the latter part of the second week. Delegates clarified  their positions on the Kyoto Protocol mechanisms and agreed that  a new synthesis document should be prepared. Progress was also  made on compliance. Difficulties remained in a number of  methodological debates and on proposals for an expanded biennium  budget from the FCCC Executive Secretary. The sessions were  punctuated by a series of three bomb scares resulting in  evacuations from the Maritim Hotel.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FCCC AND THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

The FCCC was adopted on 9 May 1992, and was opened for signature  at the UN Conference on Environment and Development in June  1992. The Convention entered into force on 21 March 1994, 90  days after receipt of the 50th ratification. To date, it has  been ratified by 177 countries.

### COP-1

The first meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the  FCCC (COP-1) took place in Berlin from 28 March - 7 April 1995.  In addition to addressing a number of important issues related  to the future of the Convention, delegates reached agreement on  what many believed to be the central issue before COP-1 -  adequacy of commitments, the 'Berlin Mandate.' The result was to  establish an open-ended Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate  (AGBM) to begin a process toward appropriate action for the  period beyond 2000, including the strengthening of the  commitments of Annex I Parties through the adoption of a  protocol or another legal instrument.

COP-1 also requested the Secretariat to arrange for sessions of  SBSTA and SBI. SBSTA was established to serve as the link  between the information provided by competent international  bodies and the policy-oriented needs of the COP. During the AGBM  process, SBSTA addressed several issues, including the treatment  of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's (IPCC) Second  Assessment Report (SAR). SBI was created to develop  recommendations to assist the COP in the review and assessment  of the implementation of the Convention and in the preparation  and implementation of its decisions. SBI also addressed several  key issues during the AGBM process, such as national  communications and activities implemented jointly.

The Ad Hoc Group on Article 13 (AG13) was set up to consider the  establishment of a multilateral consultative process (MCP)  available to Parties to resolve questions on implementation.  AG13-1, held from 30-31 October 1995 in Geneva, decided to  request Parties, non-Parties, and intergovernmental and non- governmental organizations to make written submissions in  response to a questionnaire on an MCP. Delegates continued their  discussion over the course of the next three meetings. At their  fifth session, they agreed that the MCP should be advisory  rather than supervisory in nature and AG13 should complete its  work by COP-4.

### AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE

The AGBM met eight times  between August 1995 and COP-3 in December 1997. During the first  three sessions, delegates focused on analyzing and assessing  possible policies and measures to strengthen the commitments of  Annex I Parties, how Annex I countries might distribute or share  new commitments and whether commitments should take the form of  an amendment or protocol. AGBM-4, which coincided with COP-2 in  Geneva in July 1996, completed its in-depth analysis of the  likely elements of a protocol, and States appeared ready to  prepare a negotiating text. At AGBM-5 in December 1996,  delegates recognized the need to decide whether to allow  mechanisms that would provide Annex I Parties with flexibility  in meeting quantified emissions limitation and reduction  objectives (QELROs).

As the protocol was drafted during the sixth and seventh  sessions of the AGBM, in March and August 1997, respectively,  delegates 'streamlined' a framework compilation text by merging  or eliminating some overlapping provisions within the myriad of  proposals. Much of the discussion centered on a proposal from  the EU for a 15% cut in a 'basket' of three greenhouse gases  (GHGs) by the year 2010 as compared to 1990 levels. In October  1997, as AGBM- 8 began, US President Bill Clinton called for  'meaningful participation' by developing countries in the  negotiating position he announced in Washington. With those  words, the debates that shaped agreement back in 1995  resurfaced, with an insistence on G-77/China involvement once  again linked to the level of ambition acceptable by the US. In  response, the G-77/China distanced itself from attempts to draw  developing countries into agreeing to anything that could be  interpreted as new commitments.

### COP-3

COP-3 was held from 1-11 December 1997 in Kyoto, Japan.  Over 10,000 participants, including representatives from  governments, intergovernmental organizations, NGOs and the  media, attended the Conference, which included a high-level  segment featuring statements from over 125 ministers. Following  a week and a half of intense formal and informal negotiations,  including a session that began on the final evening and lasted  into the following day, Parties to the FCCC adopted the Kyoto  Protocol on 11 December. In the Kyoto Protocol, Annex I Parties  to the FCCC agreed to commitments to reduce their overall  emissions of six GHGs by at least 5% below 1990 levels between  2008 and 2012. The Protocol also established emissions trading,  'joint implementation' (JI) between developed countries, and a  'clean development mechanism' (CDM) to encourage joint emissions  reduction projects between developed and developing countries.  The Protocol will enter into force after 55 Parties, including  Annex I countries that account in total for at least 55% of  carbon dioxide emissions for 1990, have ratified it. To date, 84  countries have signed and nine have ratified the Kyoto Protocol.

### POST-KYOTO FCCC MEETINGS

The subsidiary bodies of the FCCC met  from 2-12 June 1998 in Bonn. SBSTA-8 agreed to draft conclusions  on, inter alia, cooperation with relevant international  organizations, methodological issues, and education and  training. SBI-8 reached conclusions on, inter alia, national  communications, the financial mechanism and the second review of  adequacy of Annex I Party commitments. In its sixth session,  AG13 concluded its work on the MCP's functions. After joint  SBI/SBSTA consideration and extensive contact group debates on  the flexibility mechanisms, delegates could only agree to a  compilation document containing proposals from the G-77/China,  the EU and the US on the issues for discussion and frameworks  for implementation.

### COP-4

The Fourth Conference of the Parties (COP-4) was held  from 2-13 November 1998 in Buenos Aires, Argentina, and was  attended by over 5,000 participants. During the two-week  meeting, delegates deliberated decisions for the COP during SBI- 9 and SBSTA-9. Issues related to the Kyoto Protocol were  considered in joint SBI/SBSTA sessions. A high-level segment,  which heard statements from over 100 ministers and heads of  delegation, was convened on Thursday, 12 November. Following  hours of high-level 'closed door' negotiations and a final  plenary session that concluded early Saturday morning, delegates  adopted the Buenos Aires Plan of Action. Under the Plan of  Action, the Parties declared their determination to strengthen  the implementation of the Convention and prepare for the future  entry into force of the Kyoto Protocol. The Plan contains the  Parties' resolution to demonstrate substantial progress on: the  financial mechanism; the development and transfer of technology;  the implementation of FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9 (adverse  effects), as well as Protocol Articles 2.3 and 3.14 (adverse  effects); activities implemented jointly (AIJ); the mechanisms  of the Kyoto Protocol; and the preparations for the first  meeting of the Parties (COP/MOP-1).

# SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE (SBSTA)

SBSTA Chair Kok Kee Chow (Malaysia) opened the first meeting on  Monday, 31 May 1999, and introduced the agenda  (FCCC/SBSTA/1999/1). He emphasized SBSTA's role in ensuring that  the Buenos Aires Plan of Action's goals are met. He drew  attention to the election at COP-4 of Lambert Gnapelet (Central  African Republic) as SBSTA Vice Chair and Andrej Kranjc  (Slovenia) as Rapporteur. In his opening statement to both  subsidiary bodies, FCCC Executive Secretary Michael Zammit  Cutajar emphasized COP-5's importance as a potential 'stepping  stone' to produce outcomes that strengthen and maintain national  capacities for developing countries and countries with economies  in transition. He said the subsidiary body sessions should  identify the goals of COP-5 and the meetings and workshops  required to help implement COP-6's objectives.

SBSTA considered: cooperation with relevant international  organizations; Annex I communications; methodological issues;  FCCC Article 6 (education, training and public awareness);  development and transfer of technologies; research and  systematic observation; and implementation of FCCC Articles 4.8  and 4.9 (adverse effects). During the course of the two weeks,  contact groups and informal consultations were convened for some  agenda items following discussion in plenary.

# COOPERATION WITH RELEVANT INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

Delegates considered cooperation with relevant scientific  organizations on Monday, 31 May. IPCC Chair Robert Watson noted  that the IPCC has its most intense work programme ever, largely  in response to requests from SBSTA and the FCCC, and said it  faces a significant budget problem that will require more  funding from governments. He noted the IPCC's acceptance of the  Special Report on 'Aviation and the Global Atmosphere,' as well  as the list of Policy-relevant Scientific Questions that will be  addressed in the Synthesis Report of the Third Assessment Report  (TAR). He also noted significant progress on preparation of the  TAR. Several delegates called for steps to resolve the IPCC's  funding problems.

On cooperation with other UN bodies, the Secretariat drew  attention to collaboration with UNCTAD, UNDP, UNEP and UNIDO.  UNEP said it had been collaborating with the FCCC Secretariat on  a capacity-building project relating to the CDM and directed at  developing countries and countries with economies in transition.  A number of delegates called for an elaboration of what capacity  building means. They stressed the need to strengthen national  capacities and widen the scope of future efforts beyond the  Protocol mechanisms.

On cooperation with other conventions, Chair Chow emphasized  cooperation with the Convention to Combat Desertification (CCD)  and the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD). Gregoire de  Kalbermatten, CCD Secretariat, said that as the issues addressed  by FCCC, CCD and CBD are intimately connected, initiatives to  build stronger links should be encouraged. He stated that the  benefits of inter-convention synergies would not be fully  realized as long as resources were lacking, particularly in  developing countries. Kalemani Mulongoy, CBD Secretariat,  highlighted areas where SBSTA-10 could assist the CBD's work  programme, including: considering the best modalities to address  coral bleaching; furthering the understanding of forest  biodiversity and climate change interactions; and contributing  climate-related information to the CBD's work on education and  public awareness.

Delegates adopted the conclusions on cooperation with relevant  international organizations (FCCC/SBSTA/1999/L.7) on Thursday,  10 June. In its conclusions, SBSTA noted the IPCC's need for  sufficient resources to prepare special reports on  methodological and technological issues in technology transfer,  emissions scenarios of greenhouse gases and aerosol precursors,  land use, land-use change and forestry, as well as on good  practices in inventory management. It noted the relevant  activities in other UN bodies and encouraged the Secretariat to  continue drawing upon the contributions of the other bodies for  the development of a joint project on capacity building. It  requested the Secretariat to make further information available  for consideration at SBSTA-11 and continue to explore with other  UN partner organizations areas where their expertise and  resources could support the work programmes under the Convention  process.

Regarding cooperation with other conventions, SBSTA noted the  substantive linkages between the FCCC and the CBD and CCD and  welcomed efforts to explore ways of cooperating with the other  conventions' secretariats in order to strengthen cooperation on  issues of common interest.

# NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS FROM PARTIES INCLUDED IN ANNEX I TO THE  CONVENTION

On Tuesday, 1 June, SBSTA considered national communications  from Annex I Parties, including guidelines for the preparation  of national communications, the review process related to  greenhouse gas inventories, and the work programme on  methodological issues related to Protocol Articles 5  (methodology), 7 (communications) and 8 (review of information).

### GUIDELINES FOR THE PREPARATION OF NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS

On  guidelines for national communications, the IPCC noted its  recent work to improve guidelines for national inventory  preparation. AUSTRALIA called for separate development of  guidelines for national communications inventory data. NORWAY  said more experience on the use of guidelines was necessary  before a final decision is taken. The EU and JAPAN supported a  common reporting format (CRF) proposed for inventory data  guidelines. The US cautioned against overly prescriptive  guidelines. CANADA stressed substance, not timing, as the most  important consideration and, with POLAND, said it is impractical  for Parties to report on all climate change-related policies and  measures. RUSSIA opposed Canada's suggestion for an annual  system of providing inventories, as it would be costly and  difficult.

A contact group, co-chaired by Jim Penman (UK) and Mark  Mwandosya (Tanzania), was convened to consider this issue  further. The group held nine meetings from 2-11 June, and  considered guidelines for inventory and non-inventory reporting,  the draft decisions and conclusions on these guidelines, draft  conclusions on the review process related to greenhouse gas  inventories, and draft conclusions on a work programme on  methodological issues related to Protocol Articles 5, 7 and 8.  The group negotiated text for all relevant documents for  consideration by SBSTA, except in the case of the non-inventory  part of the guidelines, where it did not complete its  deliberations.

On Thursday, 10 June, SBSTA considered the Chair's draft  conclusions and a draft decision for the COP on guidelines for  the preparation of national communications (FCCC/SBSTA/1999/L.5  and Add.1). Chair Chow informed delegates that discussion on the  non-inventory part of the guidelines relating to projections,  policies and measures, financial resources and transfer of  technology, and other matters, was not concluded in the contact  group convened at this session, and will continue at SBSTA-11.

In a section of the draft conclusions requesting Parties not  using the common reporting format for certain sectoral  background data tables on land use, land-use change and forestry  to specify alternative formats, CHINA added a specific reference  noting that this request included Annex I Parties. On the  proposed title for the non-inventory part of the guidelines, the  EU suggested shortening it to read 'UNFCCC reporting guidelines  on national reports,' as agreed in the contact group. ANTIGUA  AND BARBUDA said the title should not be amended until  consideration of the content had been completed. Delegates  agreed to retain the current title but with a note that it will  be subject to further discussion at the next session. Delegates  adopted the draft conclusions, as amended, and the draft  decision for the COP. Chair Chow noted that they will be  forwarded to SBI for its consideration.

The Chair's conclusions on guidelines for national  communications (FCCC/SBSTA/1999/L.5), inter alia, noted that  SBSTA: advised the SBI to set up a two-year trial period  starting in early 2000 to assess FCCC reporting guidelines on  annual inventories, with a view to revising it at COP-7;  requested the IPCC to provide its report on work uncertainties  and good practices in time for consideration at SBSTA-12;  decided to continue discussions on revisions to the non- inventory part of the guidelines at SBSTA-11; and requested the  Secretariat to prepare a document reflecting the state of  discussions at the close of SBSTA-10.

The draft decision, annexed to the conclusions, recommends that  the COP, inter alia: adopt the guidelines on inventories;  instruct Annex I Parties to use the inventory guidelines for  reporting inventories due by 15 April each year, beginning in  2000; invite Parties to submit separately to the Secretariat, by  1 July 2001, information on experiences using the guidelines  during 2000-2001, particularly in relation to the CRF; request  the Secretariat to prepare a report on the guidelines for  consideration at SBSTA-15; and consider revisions to the  guidelines at SBSTA-15 for a decision at COP-7. The guidelines,  including the common reporting format (CRF), are contained in an  annex to the draft decision.

### REVIEW PROCESS RELATED TO GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORIES

On  Tuesday, 1 June, SBSTA considered the review process related to  greenhouse gas inventories. POLAND noted that if Parties decide  to change inventory methodology, artificial reduction of  emissions may occur, and proposed recalculating emissions  whenever the COP adopts new or amended emissions inventory  methodology. The contact group that convened to consider the  guidelines for Annex I communications also deliberated on the  review process related to greenhouse gas inventories work  programme, on Friday, 4 June, and negotiated text for the draft  conclusions.

On Wednesday, 9 June, SBSTA adopted the draft conclusions on the  review process relating to greenhouse gas inventories  (FCCC/SBSTA/1999/L.4). In its conclusions, SBSTA endorsed  elements of the FCCC technical review process, including the  annual initial checks, annual synthesis and assessment and  individual reviews, and advised SBI to consider guidelines for a  technical review at its eleventh session.

### WORK PROGRAMME ON METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES RELATED TO PROTOCOL  ARTICLES 5, 7 AND 8

On Tuesday, 1 June, SBSTA considered the  work programme on methodological issues under Protocol Articles  5 (methodological issues), 7 (communication of information) and  8 (review of information). The EU said early completion of the  work programme should be followed by a testing period to  guarantee gradual refinement of guidelines and modalities.  CANADA underscored the importance of developing realistic review  guidelines and, with the US, called for a more streamlined  approach. AUSTRALIA emphasized defining realistic objectives for  COP-6 and maintaining a clear sense of the different  requirements of the Convention and the Protocol. The joint  SBSTA/SBI contact group that considered Annex I communications,  also deliberated on the work programme and the drafted Chair's  conclusions on this issue.

SBSTA considered the draft conclusions on the work programme on  methodological issues (FCCC/ SBSTA/1999/L.3) on Tuesday, 8 June.  The EU requested changing the date of submission from 15 August  to 15 September to allow time for preparation. Chair Chow said  the current deadline meant Parties could receive the compiled  views prior to COP-5. Delegates adopted the draft conclusions  without amendment.

The conclusions noted, inter alia, that the SBSTA: broadly  endorsed the work programme contained in document  FCCC/SBSTA/1999/2, noting that some aspects relating to Protocol  Article 3 (QELROs) may require further discussion in relation to  Protocol Articles 5, 7 and 8; decided to consider the  characteristics of national systems and issues relating to  adjustments at SBSTA-11, with a request for Parties to provide  views by 15 August 1999; and requested that the Secretariat  organize a workshop on methodology prior to SBSTA-12, and  develop plans for a workshop on Protocol Articles 5, 7 and 8.

# METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES

### LAND USE, LAND-USE CHANGE AND FORESTRY

SBSTA considered land  use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) on Tuesday and  Wednesday, 1-2 June. Paul Maclons (South Africa), Co-Chair of a  SBSTA workshop held in Indianapolis in April 1999, reported on  the workshop, which focused on other land use activities. IPCC  Chair Robert Watson outlined a Special Report being prepared on  LULUCF. Key issues to be addressed include, inter alia: the  implications of different definitions, including 'forests,'  'afforestation,' 'deforestation' and 'reforestation;' the  question of which carbon pools should be considered when  evaluating implications for relevant net carbon emissions; the  accuracy of measurements for each type of carbon pool; and the  factors to be used in setting baselines. The MARSHALL ISLANDS  said no new sink categories should be adopted until accounting  difficulties have been resolved.

AUSTRALIA called for focus on key policy and procedural issues  relevant to the negotiating process. The EU stressed the need  for clear definitions of terms and for work on the eligibility  of additional activities between now and COP-6. The US stressed  making timely decisions on LULUCF. SAUDI ARABIA, SWITZERLAND,  GREENPEACE and others expressed reservations about the proposed  timing for deliberation on some issues, noting the relevance of  the Special Report.

A contact group, co-chaired by Paul Maclons (South Africa) and  Maciej Sadowski (Poland), was convened to consider policy and  procedural issues relating to LULUCF. The group met six times  from 2-9 June to develop and negotiate draft conclusions on  methodological issues relating to LULUCF. With participants in  general agreement that many decisions must await SBSTA's  consideration of the relevant IPCC Special Report due in May  2000, discussions on the text focused primarily on issues of  timing and procedure. After protracted negotiations, the group  concluded its work on Wednesday, 9 June, adopting the draft  conclusions.

The draft conclusions were considered by SBSTA on Thursday, 10  June. ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA questioned a sentence he said could be  interpreted as signaling that substantive decision-making on  LULUCF will take place at SBSTA-11. After lengthy discussions,  delegates agreed to delete the text that some delegations said  was ambiguous. The draft conclusions were adopted, as amended.

In its conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/1999/L.9), SBSTA invited Parties  to review and, where possible, respond to questions posed in  tables 1 and 2 of its document on LULUCF and policy and  procedural issues (FCCC/SBSTA/1999/5), and to identify any  additional related issues. It requested Parties to provide  submissions by 16 August 1999 for compilation into a  miscellaneous document that can be considered at SBSTA-11. It  also:* invited IPCC to provide an in-depth progress report and  convene a special side event on its draft Special Report on  LULUCF at SBSTA-11; * decided to further consider the process and timing for  analysis of the IPCC report, and the process of developing its  LULUCF work programme at SBSTA-11; * requested the Secretariat to organize a workshop, to be held  between SBSTA-12 and COP-6, to analyze the Special Report, and  invited Parties to provide guidance to the Secretariat on the  workshop's scope; * invited the IPCC to develop a work plan addressing  methodological issues raised in its upcoming report, once the  report is completed; and, * decided to start consideration at SBSTA-11 on the need for  country-specific data and information and its relationship to a  decision-making framework in the context of the Protocol's  requirements, and requested submissions on this from Parties.

### EMISSIONS RESULTING FROM FUEL USED FOR INTERNATIONAL  TRANSPORTATION

On Tuesday, 2 June, the Secretariat reported to  SBSTA that the International Maritime Organization (IMO) is  currently considering a study on emissions from ships to develop  an internationally accepted policy document. The International  Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) presented an overview of  technology and standards, operational measures and market-based  options aimed at providing a technical and policy basis for  decisions to limit bunker emissions. SWITZERLAND stressed the  need to introduce more stringent regulations, improve air  traffic management nationally and internationally and use  economic instruments such as eliminating tax privileges on  aviation fuel. SAUDI ARABIA said the use of market-based  mechanisms would burden developing countries.

Regarding reporting of bunker emissions, the EU proposed that  any decision on their inclusion in national inventories should  be applied in the second commitment period. The US preferred  treating bunker emissions separately from national inventories,  which the EU said results in no direct incentives to limit or  reduce bunker emissions. The REPUBLIC OF KOREA called for  further clarification in defining international bunker fuels.

On allocation of bunker emissions, AUSTRALIA highlighted the  need to establish a policy framework and adopt the most suitable  method of recording emissions. Stating that this is a  complicated process, JAPAN called on ICAO and IMO to provide the  information necessary to help identify possible solutions. The  EU said it would be practical to include bunker fuel emissions  in inventories of Parties where the fuel is sold.

José Romero (Switzerland) conducted informal consultations on  the Chair's draft conclusions. Delegates adopted these  conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/1999/L.8) on Friday, 11 June. In its  conclusions, SBSTA noted the need for further methodological  work to ensure consistent and transparent inventories and  invited Annex I Parties to provide emission data and information  on methods used as part of their annual greenhouse gas  inventory. It also, inter alia: requested Parties to provide  comments on the informal paper prepared by the Secretariat on  methods used to collect data and estimate and report emissions  from international bunker fuels; invited the Secretariat to  explore ways of strengthening information exchange between ICAO,  IMO and SBSTA; and decided to continue its work to elaborate  inclusion of bunker fuel emissions in overall greenhouse gas  emissions inventories.

# OTHER MATTERS ON METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES

Delegates considered other matters on methodological issues on  Wednesday, 2 June. UNEP outlined its recent work on impacts,  adaptation and mitigation assessment methodologies, including  provision of guidance for national strategy development and  capacity building on GHG abatement. TANZANIA suggested  establishing FCCC collaborating centers in developing countries  for information purposes and capacity building. UGANDA supported  regional capacity building and South-South sharing of expertise.  BRAZIL reported on a recent workshop held to consider its  proposal on determining responsibility based on historical  emissions. He noted that the proposal would be on SBSTA-11's  agenda.

Delegates adopted the conclusions on this item  (FCCC/SBSTA/1999/L.6) on Wednesday, 9 June, which encouraged  UNEP and other relevant institutions to review their activities  to support capacity building in methodologies for impacts,  adaptation and mitigation assessment. SBSTA decided to consider  the proposal by Brazil at SBSTA-11 and invited Brazil to provide  other relevant information.

On Friday, 11 June, ARGENTINA raised the issue of the use of  hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) in metered dose inhalers for asthma  treatment. She noted that whereas the Kyoto Protocol determined  that HFCs have a thermoactive quality and has included them as  compounds that contribute to global warming, the Montreal  Protocol has identified them as a substitute for ozone-depleting  chlorofluorocarbons. She urged SBSTA to consider the issue in  future sessions. SBSTA decided to consider this issue at SBSTA- 11.

NEW ZEALAND introduced a proposed draft conclusion on inventory  and methodological issues relating to harvested wood products  that invites Parties to submit their views on harvested wood  products and requests the Secretariat to compile these  submissions into a miscellaneous document for preliminary  consideration at SBSTA-11. SBSTA deferred discussions on this  issue to SBSTA-11.

# EDUCATION, TRAINING AND PUBLIC AWARENESS

Education, training and public awareness was considered on  Monday, 31 May. Chair Chow noted that only three submissions had  been received from Parties on possible means of promoting the  implementation of FCCC Article 6 (Education, training and public  awareness). The Secretariat was unable to formulate proposals on  ways to integrate this issue into SBSTA's work programme. He  proposed setting a new date for submissions. The EU suggested  further pursuing education, training and public awareness in the  work on good practices in policies and measures. He called on  the Secretariat to advise on the likely costs of undertaking  further work on these issues. The REPUBLIC OF KOREA noted the  need for a technical guide to support developing countries and  welcomed the private sector participation in promoting awareness  activities. Parties were invited to submit further proposals to  the Secretariat by 15 October 1999 to serve as a basis for more  substantive discussions at SBSTA-12.

# DEVELOPMENT AND TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY

Delegates discussed the development and transfer of technology  on Wednesday, Thursday and Friday, 2-4 June. The IPCC reported  on the status of the forthcoming Special Report on  Methodological and Technological Issues in Technology Transfer  that will present a broad conceptual framework on the  complexities of technology transfer and illuminate the role of  governments and other stakeholders.

Delegates welcomed the Secretariat's proposal to organize  regional workshops as part of the consultative process on the  development and transfer of technology initiated at COP-4. JAPAN  noted the important input the forthcoming IPCC Special Report  will make to the process and stressed the need for close  coordination between SBSTA and the IPCC. The US, NETHERLANDS,  GERMANY, FRANCE, JAPAN and AUSTRALIA announced financial  contributions to support the consultative process. THAILAND  offered to host a regional workshop. The EU favored a practical  sectoral approach for the forthcoming workshops and said they  should take stock of existing expertise, technology needs and  capacity building. EGYPT emphasized the need to make publicly- owned technology available to developing countries and expressed  concern about the limited attention given to adaptation  technologies. AUSTRALIA stressed the importance of country- specific market-based approaches, the private sector and the  role of the CDM in facilitating technology transfer.

The G-77/CHINA stated that technology transfer could not take  place under the market process. He stressed the need to address  technology transfer in the broadest sense and incorporate  elements of capacity building, public awareness, installation  and smooth transfer from the donor to the recipient. He  highlighted the need for rules and procedures to govern the  transfer of technology, called for an increase in the  Secretariat's budgetary allocation to fund capacity building for  technology transfer, and suggested creating a permanent  mechanism to facilitate technology transfer. The PHILIPPINES,  with CAMEROON, said technology transfer should be tackled as a  commitment, not as a commercial undertaking. CANADA stated that  technology transfer is critical to achieving the long-term goals  of the Convention and Protocol. She described the private sector  as the main vehicle for the transfer, and said the challenge is  to create an enabling environment and implement enabling  activities leading to continuous transfer. She added that  investments associated with the CDM and JI mechanisms will be  instrumental in transferring efficient and effective climate  change technology to non-Annex I Parties and economies in  transition.

The Climate Technology Initiative described its work addressing  the questions and issues raised by Decision 4/CP.4, through,  inter alia, regional seminars on technology diffusion in  coordination with business partners.

In the conclusions on this agenda item (FCCC/SBSTA/1999/L. 10),  SBSTA, inter alia: endorsed the proposals to organize three  regional workshops; requested the Chair, with assistance from  the Secretariat, to report to SBSTA-12 on the workshops with a  view to taking a decision at COP-6; welcomed offers of financial  and/or in-kind support and encouraged other Parties to provide  additional contributions for the consultative process; invited  Parties to submit views regarding options to accelerate and  sustain the development and transfer of coastal adaptation  technologies; and encouraged the Secretariat to continue to  cooperate with the OECD Development Assistance Committee in  improving the availability of climate-relevant data from its  reporting system.

# RESEARCH AND SYSTEMATIC OBSERVATION

SBSTA considered research and systematic observation on Monday,  31 May, and Tuesday, 1 June. Kirk Dawson, Global Climate  Observing System (GCOS), reported on activities undertaken in  response to the decisions of SBSTA-9 and COP-4. He stressed the  need for, inter alia: greater guidance for Parties' submissions  on national plans and programmes for systematic observation;  long-term funding for ongoing operations; and systems consistent  with infrastructural levels in developing countries. He said  GCOS was exploring the establishment of an intergovernmental  board to provide guidance on addressing priority issues and  proposing a series of implementation meetings that could also be  used to identify regional scientific policy or funding issues.  He called for SBSTA's assistance in mobilizing the necessary  resources.

The US expressed concern at the declining state of the global  observational network. CANADA, with the EU and RUSSIA, urged  support for GCOS. The MARSHALL ISLANDS called for development of  national plans to address observational gaps and data  deficiencies and for support to strengthen endogenous  capacities. Informal consultations, co-chaired by Philip Gwage  (Uganda) and Susan Barrell (Australia), were held on this issue.  In the conclusions on this agenda item (FCCC/SBSTA/1999/L.2),  SBSTA decided to consider, at SBSTA-11, the preliminary draft  guidance for reporting on systematic observation prepared by  GCOS; invited agencies participating in the Climate Agenda,  through the GCOS Secretariat, to report to SBSTA-11 on their  further actions and plans; urged Parties to enhance support for  capacity building in developing countries to reverse the  degradation of their observing capacities; and noted the need  for Parties to support research on climate change.

# IMPLEMENTATION OF CONVENTION ARTICLES 4.8 AND 4.9 (ADVERSE  EFFECTS)

On Friday, 4 June, SBI Vice Chair Mohammed Reza Salamat (Iran)  reported on informal consultations conducted on behalf of the  SBI and SBSTA Chairs on the terms of reference for an expert  workshop envisaged on implementation of Articles 4.8 and 4.9 of  the Convention and Articles 2.3 and 3.14 of the Protocol  (adverse effects). He said the group reached consensus on the  terms of reference (FCCC/SBSTA/1999/CRP.1) that will be annexed  to Decision 5/CP.4 that initiated the consultations. The  technical workshop, which is scheduled for 22-24 September 1999,  will aim to identify: factors that will determine the adverse  effects of climate change and the impacts of implementing  response measures; and existing information gaps, needs and  views on methodologies. It will further consider the specific  needs of the least developed countries, and issues raised in  national submissions and communications. He stressed the need  for balanced participation in the workshop by developed and  developing country experts, in particular from Africa. The G-77/CHINA reserved its right to introduce substantive issues  should other Parties do the same. Delegates adopted the terms of  reference.

# SBSTA FINAL PLENARY

On Friday, 11 June, Parties adopted the draft report of the  session (FCCC/SBSTA/1999/L.1). The Rapporteur said an additional  paragraph will be added to the final report, stating that the  Secretariat will assess its capacity to carry out activities  requested in the conclusions on work for the biennium 2000-2001  and will report back to the subsidiary bodies at the next  sessions.

FCCC Executive Secretary Zammit Cutajar thanked SBSTA for its  work and said it is developing into a repository of competence  and expertise that is making good advances. Chair Chow noted  that this was the end of his term as SBSTA Chair. He said SBSTA  is a body that provides excellent advice to the SBI and the COP  and thanked delegates for their efforts and initiative in  ensuring that the process has moved forward.

# SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION (SBI)

On Monday, 31 May, SBI Chair Bakary Kante (Senegal) opened the  session by introducing the provisional agenda (FCCC/SBI/1999/1)  and introduced the new officers, SBI Vice Chair Mohammad Reza  Salamat (Iran) and Klaus Radunsky (Austria), Rapporteur. He said  that, following consultations with the COP Bureau, the second  review of adequacy of commitments would be addressed at COP-5;  Turkey's request to be taken out of Annex I would be discussed  in the run-up to COP-5; and Kazakhstan's request to amend Annex  I would be on the provisional agenda for COP-5.

SBI discussed: Annex I and non-Annex I communications;  implementation of FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9 (adverse effects);  arrangements for intergovernmental meetings; and administrative  and financial matters. During the course of the two weeks,  contact groups and informal consultations were convened for some  agenda items following initial discussion in plenary.

SWITZERLAND stated that while this SBI session should advance as  many elements of the Buenos Aires Plan of Action as possible, it  should also strive to make progress on implementation of the  Convention. He called for a strong and enforceable compliance  regime and reliable procedures for verification and  certification. CHINA, with the REPUBLIC OF KOREA, said the item  on the timing of second non-Annex I communications was  premature, as only 11 developing countries had submitted first  national communications. He attributed this delay to the GEF.  The EU, with the US, said proper consideration of initial  national communications should result in improved second  national communications.

On implementation of Articles 4.8 and 4.9 (adverse effects), the  Chair conveyed the decision of the SBI/SBSTA Chairs to set up a  Friends of the Chair group, consisting of the Vice-Chair of SBI,  Coordinator of the G-77/China, the EU, countries with economies  in transition and JUSCANZ, to finalize the workshop's terms of  reference on the issue.

# NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS FROM PARTIES INCLUDED IN ANNEX I TO THE  CONVENTION

On Wednesday, 2 June, SBI considered annual GHG inventories from  Annex I Parties. The EU called for a single document containing  all available data from Annex I Parties and urged Parties that  had not done so to submit their inventories. The US underscored  the importance of high-quality reports and questioned the delay  in submission of Annex I inventories. It was decided that a  joint SBSTA/SBI contact group would be convened to consider  several relevant documents relating to Annex I communications,  including draft conclusions and draft decisions. The contact  group held nine meetings during the session.

On Thursday, 10 June, SBI adopted draft conclusions on the  elements of national communications by Annex I Parties contained  in the SBI agenda, and adopted the draft conclusions on annual  inventories of national greenhouse gas data for 1996  (FCCC/SBI/1999/L.5) and the future review process, including  that under Protocol Articles 7 and 8 (communication and review  of information) (FCCC/SBI/1999/L.7). On FCCC reporting  guidelines on projections, policies and measures, financial  resources, transfer of technology and other matters, CANADA  noted SBSTA's agreement to hold further discussions. Conclusions  referred by SBSTA on review processes for GHG inventories of  Annex I Parties and a work programme on methodological issues  relating to Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Protocol were adopted.

The conclusions on annual inventories of national greenhouse gas  data for 1996 stated, inter alia, that the SBI: noted that  further efforts are required to ensure adherence to guidelines  by Annex I Parties, in particular in the provision of data on  LULUCF, and in data on emissions of HFCs, perfluorocarbons  (PFCs) and sulphur hexafluoride (SF6); urged Annex I Parties  that had not already done so to submit their annual national  greenhouse gas inventories as soon as possible; and noted that  the majority of Parties that reported data for 1990-1996 exhibit  increasing aggregate greenhouse gas emissions, and, according to  available information, will not reduce emissions to 1990 levels  by 2000.

On the review process, the SBI conclusions, inter alia: noted  that consideration of issues related to interim reporting should  be postponed until issues relating to Protocol reporting and  review had been resolved; expressed concern that only seven in- depth review reports could be published prior to SBI-10; and  requested the Secretariat to prepare a report on experiences  with the review of second national communications for  consideration at SBI-12.

Matters relating to Annex I communications referred by SBSTA  were adopted (FCCC/SBI/1999/L.2, L.3, and L.6). On SBSTA's  conclusions relating to the technical review process for Annex I  GHG inventories, SBI, inter alia: agreed on the preliminary  elements of a draft decision for consideration by COP-5; decided  to consider draft guidelines for technical reviews of greenhouse  gas inventories at SBI-11; invited Parties to submit their views  on the draft guidelines to the Secretariat by 1 October 1999;  and requested the Secretariat to develop a work plan for the  technical review process, for the period 2000 to 2002, for  consideration at SBI-11.

#     Non-Annex I Communications

Decisions 10/CP.2 and 12/CP.4 requested the Secretariat, for  each SBI session, to: provide details of financial support made  available to non-Annex I Parties by the GEF; and facilitate  assistance to Parties in preparing their national communications  and make available a list of projects submitted by non-Annex I  Parties in accordance with FCCC Article 12.4 (financial support  for communications).

On Monday, 31 May, in SBI's opening plenary, the EU, with the  US, stated that national communications can help identify  further means to assist non-Annex I Parties in their efforts to  implement Article 12 (communication of information) and  indicated the need for a COP decision on the process of  consideration before the timing of second national  communications is decided.

The US said the revision of guidelines was fundamental to  improving second national communications, and proposed expanding  the guidelines to provide for, inter alia, broader coverage and  disaggregation of GHG inventories and information on GHG  emissions trends. AUSTRALIA supported revision of guidelines for  non-Annex I communications and said the revision should be  complete before the lodgement date of second national  communications. The REPUBLIC OF KOREA said consideration of non- Annex I Parties' communications should identify their financial  and technical difficulties in GHG limitation and should be  undertaken when more non-Annex I Party communications are  available.

SBI continued discussion of non-Annex I communications in a  contact group, co-chaired by Dan Reifsnyder (US) and Paul  Maclons (South Africa). On financial and technical support for  non-Annex I communications, the Alliance of Small Island States  (AOSIS) cautioned against standardizing content requirements for  national communications and indicated the benefits of permitting  small States to complete national communications on a regional  basis. Noting that the GEF had increased funding for non-Annex I  communications, the EU said the financial mechanism had  responded effectively to developing country needs. The G-77/CHINA called for clear guidance on financial and technical  support and said the GEF did not provide adequate funding.  BOTSWANA, ZIMBABWE and the CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC said the  preparation of national communications should be an ongoing  process and noted that practical difficulties faced by non-Annex  I Parties impede the necessary continuity.

On Saturday, 5 June, the group considered a draft decision  tabled by the G-77/China on initial and subsequent non-Annex I  communications. Delegates focused on a provision establishing a  non-Annex I Group of Experts, with a view to enhancing support  for preparation of communications, identifying difficulties  faced by countries and improving non-Annex I communications. The  US inquired how the expert group would feed back into national  processes and cautioned against duplication of work. The EU  asked about the linkage of the expert group to intergovernmental  processes. The group decided to reconvene during the week to  continue its discussions and further consider the G-77/China's  proposed draft decision.

On Tuesday, 8 June, the contact group met in an evening session  and exchanged preliminary views on a draft decision submitted by  the EU. The EU said the intent of the decision is to improve the  quality of communications and address some of the constraints  faced by non-Annex I countries. He underlined learning from  experiences gained while preparing initial communications and  making progress towards guidelines for non-Annex I second  communications as the EU's main concerns. He highlighted the  benefit of open, transparent and non-confrontational technical  assessment of non-Annex I communications. He indicated that the  IPCC Inventory Task Force could be requested to develop a work  plan to prepare a comprehensive database on regional emissions  factors. The G-77/CHINA pointed to inconsistencies between the  draft decision and previous COP decisions on providing guidance  to the operating entity of the financial mechanism. She  questioned the IPCC's capacity to gather country-specific  information. The US said it supported many of the points in the  EU's text, particularly on the usefulness of technical feedback  and the need to develop guidelines for second national  communications. TOGO noted that it was premature to think about  guidelines for second communications, as most non-Annex I  countries were still preparing their first. MEXICO said  financial support should be available not only for vulnerability  assessment but also for mitigation and adaptation efforts.

On Wednesday, 9 June, the contact group met to discuss proposed  draft decisions submitted by the EU and the G-77/CHINA and to  decide on how to proceed in preparation for COP-5. Contact Group  Co-Chair Reifsnyder proposed identifying common elements between  the two proposals. Many delegations highlighted the differences,  including: whether the initial guidelines should be revised for  second national communications; whether there should be a  technical assessment to 'consider' communications; or if a non- Annex I group of experts should provide assistance. Other  delegations noted common elements between the proposals on  information gaps, GEF enabling activities, and the need to  identify problems faced by non-Annex I countries in preparing  communications. The group opted for a text 'comparing,' rather  than combining, the two proposals.

On Friday, 11 June, delegates met to consider draft conclusions  on aspects of national communications from non-Annex I Parties.  On the input from Parties to the GEF review of enabling  activities, the PHILIPPINES deleted a reference in the draft  conclusions to the scope of enabling activities, including  various activities that facilitate the implementation of  Convention Articles 4.1 (national inventories) and 12.1  (national communications). In its conclusions  (FCCC/SBI/1999/CRP.5), SBI requested: the GEF to include in its  annual reports to the COP information about progress made on the  GEF review; and the Secretariat to prepare a report on efforts  to assist developing countries in the implementation of enabling  activities.

On the provision of financial and technical support, delegates  adopted conclusions (FCCC/SBI/1999/CRP.5), asking the  Secretariat to request the GEF to provide dates of disbursement  of funds for enabling-activity projects for preparation of non- Annex I initial national communications. At the request of the  PHILIPPINES and the EU, the conclusions accepted continuing  consideration of this issue at SBI's next session. The  conclusions also suggested that the list of projects submitted  by non-Annex I Parties be brought to the attention of the GEF  and, 'as appropriate,' other financing agencies, and required  the contact group's Co-Chairs to prepare a framework on elements  of a draft decision, based on proposals by the G-77/CHINA and  the EU.

On timing for non-Annex I national communications, the SBI  considered and adopted draft conclusions (FCCC/SBI/1999/CRP.6)  by the Co-Chairs of the contact group, including proposed draft  decisions by the G-77/CHINA and the EU as annexes. The EU  requested that the annexes reflect the proposals as originally  submitted. The conclusions include a provision requesting the  Co-Chairs of the contact group to prepare a miscellaneous  document providing a framework for comparing the views of the G-77/CHINA and the EU as contained in the annexes. An amendment  was proposed by the PHILIPPINES calling for 'elements for draft  decisions' to be prepared instead. The SBI invited Parties to  submit further views and comments by 15 July and decided to  continue consideration of the matter at SBI-11, with a view to  recommending a decision for adoption by COP-5. The conclusions  were adopted as amended.

#     Arrangements for intergovernmental meetings

In an effort to encourage reflection on methods for making the  intergovernmental process more effective and efficient, the  Secretariat produced a document containing suggestions  (FCCC/SBI/1999/2).

On Tuesday, 1 June, Parties exchanged views on COP-5, including:  when it should commence; whether a Committee of the Whole (COW)  should be created; what form the high-level segment should take;  and what dates for COP-6 could be. Several Parties favored  establishing a COW as it would benefit small delegations.  Stating that COP-5 will be largely a technical meeting, SAUDI  ARABIA, with KAZAKHSTAN and CHINA, opposed the creation of a  COW. CANADA and SLOVENIA preferred the high-level segment but  without formal oral presentations. The EU suggested an informal  panel discussion between ministers to enable them to focus on  important political issues.

EGYPT proposed grouping controversial issues into clusters and  discussing them in workshops before COP-5. SAUDI ARABIA and  CHINA cautioned against introducing controversial issues that  could 'torpedo' the success of COP-5. The NETHERLANDS expressed  interest in hosting COP-6. Chair Kante requested the Rapporteur  to consult with Parties and find common ground on these issues.

On Monday, 7 June, SBI Rapporteur Klaus Radunsky outlined two  alternative proposals on arrangements for COP-5 and noted that,  while both scheduled the beginning of the session for 25 October  1999, one entailed a COW while the other excludes it. He said  options for the high-level segment were 1-2 November and 4-5  November. On topics for the high-level segment, he stated that  two options were being discussed. The first proposed the high- level segment to address, inter alia: experiences; key issues;  challenges with regard to innovative, efficient and state-of- the-art technologies; policies and measures; and the Protocol  mechanisms, as well as ways and means of promoting their  development. The second proposed an exchange of views on the  short- and long-term development of the Convention and the  Protocol, including the implementation of the Buenos Aires Plan  of Action.

The G-77/CHINA tabled a draft decision on arrangements for COP- 5. He indicated that, inter alia: no 'contentious' or  'extraneous' issues should be included in COP-5's agenda; no COW  need be formed; the high-level segment should take place from 3- 4 November; and ministers and heads of delegation should  participate on an equal footing. He recommended that the high- level segment address the state of implementation of the Buenos  Aires Plan of Action and the early entry into force of the  Protocol. The EU called for dynamic interaction among heads of  delegation during the high-level segment, rather than lengthy  statements. The EU, with the US, noted the need for more  consultations on arrangements for COP-5. JAPAN accepted most of  the G-77/CHINA's suggestions, except on timing for the high- level segment. He emphasized COP-5's role in building momentum  towards COP-6.

The NETHERLANDS announced its offer to host COP-6 in the Hague  and said Parties should decide whether it should be held in 2000  or 2001. The US noted its preference to hold COP-6 in 2001 in  view of the work required to solve pending issues, including the  Protocol mechanisms, compliance procedures and LULUCF. He  proposed two sessions of the subsidiary bodies to take place  between COP-5 and COP-6. AUSTRALIA said that since COP-6 had  important decisions to take it should be held early in 2001.  CANADA noted the importance of setting the technical foundation  of decisions on issues such as technology transfer, the  mechanisms and compliance. He said there should be ample  opportunities for subsidiary body discussions in 2000, which may  affect the dates for COP-6. The G-77/CHINA preferred scheduling  COP-6 in October or November 2000, and objected to additional  intersessional meetings of the subsidiary bodies. The EU  expressed its flexibility on the timing of COP-6 but underscored  the need for a prompt decision to give the Netherlands  sufficient time to prepare. Chair Kante asked John Ashe (Antigua  and Barbuda) to undertake informal consultations and report back  to the SBI.

In SBI's closing plenary session on Friday, 11 June, conclusions  (FCCC/SBI/1999/CRP.3) were adopted that: welcomed the nomination  of Mr. Jan Szyszko, Minister of Environmental Protection and  Natural Resources and Forestry of Poland, by the Group of  Eastern European States as President designate of COP-5;  recommended that COP-5 begin on 25 October 1999; made  arrangements for the high-level segment; welcomed the offer of  the Netherlands to host COP-6; and recommended dates for  meetings of the subsidiary bodies for the year 2001-2003. The  SBI recommended that the COP-5 high-level segment take place on  2-3 November 1999 and the discussion topics be: lessons learned  and progress made in dealing with climate change, and promoting  implementation of the Buenos Aires Plan of Action and entry into  force of the Protocol. The SBI decided to defer discussion on  dates for COP-6 and dates for the sessions of the subsidiary  bodies in 2000, to its eleventh session.

#     Administrative and Financial matters

On Wednesday, 2 June, the Executive Secretary introduced the  programme budget for the biennium 2000-2001  (FCCC/SBI/1999/Add.1). He highlighted its new features, inter  alia, a cross-cutting emphasis on capacity building and strong  focus on ensuring high-quality inventory data. He said the  budget also seeks to strengthen capacity within the Secretariat  to enable it to respond effectively to Parties' demands. He  informed delegates of a 50% increase in the budget for programme  activities. The PHILIPPINES stressed that capacity building was  for developing countries and not the Secretariat. IRAN, with  CHINA, BRAZIL, SAUDI ARABIA, INDIA and the PHILIPPINES,  expressed concern at the steep increase in the proposed budget's  expenditure levels.

On income and budget performance in the biennium 1998-1999, the  EU called for timely payment of contributions. The PHILIPPINES  noted that developing countries were penalized for arrears in  their contributions by being denied the benefit of the trust  fund for participation and inquired whether similar penalties  existed for Annex I countries. The EU said options to deal with  cash surpluses and carry-over of resources from previous  biennium periods required further consideration. SWITZERLAND  asked why there were unspent reserves. JAPAN said it preferred  repayment to the Parties.

Many delegates did not support the proposed 50% budget increase  or the proposed 59% rise in the number of staff. The G-77/CHINA  stated that it cannot support the extent of the proposed  increase and noted the current trend among many Parties to  support zero-growth budgets. He expressed concern that budget  proposals anticipated outcomes of COP decisions that had not yet  been made. The EU, supported by the US, CANADA and RUSSIA,  suggested that the Secretariat prepare other options for a draft  budget. He proposed scenarios based on increases of 0%, 5% and  7.5% per annum, and suggested deferring a decision on the budget  to COP-5. The US and CANADA preferred resolving the issue at  this session, given COP-5's heavy workload.

RUSSIA drew participants' attention to political realities,  stating that it would be difficult to justify the request for  such a substantial increase in funding from national decision  makers. CANADA emphasized that the Secretariat should focus on  its facilitative function. IRAN suggested that the Secretariat  provide at least two reports on biennium budgets, thus allowing  later drafts to take into account additional expenses resulting  from COP decisions. He expressed concern over the number of  consultants hired and the criteria applied to their selection.  The PHILIPPINES noted that a budget increase did not necessarily  benefit the Parties. She said greater South-South coordination  on capacity building could take some pressure off the  Secretariat.

In reference to certain programme activities outlined in the  budget, CHINA stated that the Secretariat was not mandated to  provide policy guidance to Parties but rather the other way  around. He noted the need for the budget to reflect the  prioritization of the CDM. EGYPT suggested streamlining FCCC  programme activities in areas covered by other entities. INDIA  inquired about the Secretariat's policies on gratis personnel  and suggested that the Secretariat prepare a table comparing the  proposed budget to previous ones.

On contingencies for conference services, the G-77/CHINA said  the UN General Assembly should be asked to include the FCCC's  requirements in its budget. The US said Parties should pay for  conference servicing, and suggested requesting the General  Assembly to take a decision on this matter.

The FCCC Executive Secretary referred to the Secretariat's  predicament when preparing the budget given that it had not  received guidance from Parties. He said this discussion would  help remedy the lack of guidance and noted that the proposed  budget for the 2000-2001 biennium followed previously-used  methodology. He noted difficulties in preparing a table or chart  allowing comparisons of activities from biennium to biennium. He  emphasized that while delegations did not agree to a 50% budget  increase, most had acknowledged the increase in the  Secretariat's workload. He suggested delegates consider  deferring consideration of anticipated budgetary outcomes of  upcoming COP-6 decisions until COP-6.

On the status of carry-overs, the Secretariat indicated that it  is assessed on a biannual basis and that the status for 1999  would only be known by the end of the year. The US referred to a  budgetary rule that impedes the expenditure of carry-overs from  previous period contributions as a 'perverse incentive' against  timely payment of contributions. The EU said untimely  contributions were not the only cause for carry-overs. The  Secretariat suggested a COP decision to allow expenditure of  carry-overs up to the amount approved by the budget.

The budget contact group, chaired by Mohamed Ould el Ghaouth  (Mauritania), met on Wednesday and Thursday, 9-10 June, to  continue discussing the proposed SBI conclusions and a draft  decision to COP-5 on the programme budget for the biennium 2000- 2001. The group also considered two tables. One summarizes the  proposed budget for the 2000-2001 biennium amounting to a total  of US$25.277 million. The other outlines the budget for  Secretariat staffing. The FCCC Executive Secretary indicated  that the proposed budget reduces funds allocated to programme  activities in 2000 and increases those available in 2001. He  noted that the staffing table reflects a suggested reduction in  the staff increase from a total staff of 100 to 81. A group of  countries requested that the revised proposed budget reflect the  priority to be given to the CDM through inclusion of a separate  programme. Several delegations noted the need for more detail on  programme activities and staffing in the budget. The group  undertook a paragraph-by-paragraph discussion of the proposed  SBI conclusions and draft decision. The discussion focused on  bracketed text in the draft decision, approving carry-overs to  cover part of the budget period and a contingency budget for  non-Annex I communications. The group agreed to text approving a  draw-down of US$2 million from the unspent balance or  contributions (carry-overs) from the previous biennium to cover  part of the 2000-2001 budget. The provision on a contingency  budget for non-Annex I communications remained bracketed.

On Friday, 10 June, delegates adopted conclusions  (FCCC/SBI/1999/CRP.7) on the programme budget for the biennium  2000-2001. A draft decision recommended by SBI for adoption at  COP-5 is annexed to the conclusions. The draft decision includes  provisions approving the programme budget for the biennium 2000- 2001, amounting to US$25,286,000. This represents an increase of  US$3,638,200 over the comparable figure in the current biennium  1998-1999, partly to be met by a special drawing of US$2 million  from unspent balances or contributions from previous financial  periods. The resulting increase in the total indicative  contributions due by Parties over those in the current biennium  1998-1999 would be 10.7%. A provision approving a contingency  budget for matters related to the consideration of national  communications from non-Annex I Parties, amounting to  US$1,527,900 to be added to the 2000-2001 programme budget,  remains bracketed. Annexed to the draft decision are tables  specifying: programme and staffing expenditures; resource  requirements for contingencies and staffing related to  consideration of non-Annex I communications; estimated resource  requirements for participation in the FCCC process; and  estimated resource requirements for the Trust Fund for  Supplementary Activities.

A note (FCCC/SBI/1999/CRP.1) by SBI Chair Kante on possible  activities to be covered through supplementary funding was  forwarded to COP-5 for consideration. The note outlines an  initial list of possible activities to be undertaken through  supplementary funding, amounting to US$5,120,200 for the  biennium. The list of activities includes: organization of  workshops; production and dissemination of information products;  outreach to NGOs; software support for processing inventory  data; preparation of the report on implementation; response to  requests by Parties for additional activities related to the  mechanisms; facilitation of networking among national focal  points; cooperation with other UN bodies; and additional support  for the FCCC Fellowship Programme.

Referring to the budget increase, as outlined in the recommended  draft decision, the Executive Secretary thanked Parties for  their readiness to acknowledge the increasing workload of the  Secretariat and assured them of the Secretariat's efforts to  carefully revise the budgetary implications of any mandated  activities.

Many delegations thanked the Secretariat for being so  forthcoming with budget-related information requested by Parties  during contact group discussions. INDIA, supported by CHINA,  expressed his appreciation for the transparency with which the  consultations took place and requested more detailed information  in time for COP-5 on staffing requirements and the extent of use  of consultants from developing countries. JAPAN stated it had  diverging views on the use of carry-overs as set out in the  draft decision, noted its support for the Secretariat, and said  it would not stand in the way of consensus.

#     Institutional linkage of the FCCC Secretariat to the United  Nations

Based on informal consultations, the Secretariat produced a  draft decision (FCCC/SBI/CRP.2), which was referred to COP-5 for  adoption. The draft decision: recalls Decision 14/CP.1, which  sets 31 December 1999 as the final date to review the  institutional linkage of the FCCC Secretariat to the United  Nations; notes that the institutional linkage is working  satisfactorily; invites the UN General Assembly to decide at its  54th session whether to meet the Convention's conference  servicing expenses from its regular budget; and decides that the  institutional linkage of the Convention to the UN shall  continue, subject to review no later than 31 December 2001.

# SBI FINAL PLENARY

In its closing plenary on Friday, 11 June, delegates adopted the  draft report of the meeting contained in document  FCCC/SBI/1999/L.1. Chair Kante informed Parties about his  decision to take up a post in UNEP as Director of Policy  Development and thanked them for their support during his term  as SBI Chair. Several delegations and the Executive Secretary  expressed their appreciation for Chair Kante's work and effort.

# JOINT SBI/SBSTA SESSIONS

On Tuesday, 1 June, delegates met in a joint SBI/SBSTA session  to consider the AIJ pilot phase, procedures and mechanisms  relating to compliance under the Kyoto Protocol, and the  mechanisms pursuant to Protocol Articles 6 (JI), 12 (CDM) and 17  (emissions trading). SBSTA Chair Chow opened the joint session  and invited general statements from delegates.

On compliance under the Protocol, the G-77/CHINA said Annex I  Parties' communications should include information on Convention  implementation, particularly: policies and measures to modify  longer term trends; new and additional financial resources;  assistance to meet adaptation costs; technology transfer; and  capacity building of developing countries. AOSIS expressed  disappointment at the overall increase in Annex I Parties'  emissions, and proposed that COP-5 review implementation of  Annex I Party commitments. The EU said this meeting could make  progress on, inter alia: implementation of Annex I Party FCCC  commitments; development and transfer of technology; further  elaboration of the Protocol mechanisms, giving priority to the  CDM; and development of a strong and efficient compliance  system. The AFRICAN GROUP emphasized Africa's special needs  relating to adaptation to adverse effects, capacity building and  technology transfer. He advocated an early start to the CDM.

# PROCEDURES AND MECHANISMS RELATING TO COMPLIANCE UNDER THE KYOTO  PROTOCOL

On Monday, 31 May, delegates met in informal consultations to  exchange views on procedures and mechanisms relating to  compliance under the Kyoto Protocol. Delegates were presented  with a synthesis of submissions from Australia, Canada, the EU,  New Zealand, AOSIS, South Africa and the US  (FCCC/SB/1999/MISC.4, Adds. 1 and 2, FCCC/SB/1999/CRP.1). At the  first session of the Joint Working Group (JWG) on compliance,  held on 1 June and co-chaired by Harald Dovland (Norway) and  Espen Rønneberg (Marshall Islands), delegates debated the  proposed agenda. The G-77/CHINA called for a discussion on the  basic principles for a compliance regime, noted a lack of  submissions received from developing countries and supported the  compilation of views through a questionnaire. The EU said the  JWG should identify the compliance-related elements under the  Protocol, define the work programme, and identify linkages to  other groups. With SWITZERLAND, he called for a draft  negotiating text by COP-5. CANADA said the first task is  stocktaking of the compliance-related elements and, with NEW  ZEALAND and the US, underscored the importance of tracking other  groups' work. CLIMATE ACTION NETWORK proposed that Parties  request a synthesis of compliance-related work being done in  other subsidiary body groups or a workshop that addresses the  full range of compliance issues. JAPAN highlighted the  importance of examining other multilateral environmental  agreements. After extensive debate, Parties deleted an agenda  item on objectives and nature and added a new sub-item on 'other  elements as identified in Decision 8/CP.4 and in the progress of  work.' The JWG met five times during the session and discussed:  identification of compliance-related elements, including gaps  and suitable forums to address them; design of a compliance  system; and consequences of non-compliance. The G-77/CHINA  indicated that it had not reached a group position on these  items. On identification of compliance-related elements and  gaps, the US, with CANADA and the EU, indicated the need to  differentiate elements from gaps and proposed three categories  to identify them: substantive rules; procedures for addressing  compliance; and consequences of non-compliance. She noted that  gaps were identifiable for procedures and consequences of non- compliance other than for substantive rules. The US also noted  the need to link Protocol Articles 5 (methodological issues), 7  (communication of information), 6 (JI), 12 (CDM) and 17  (emissions trading) to compliance because the first two are  means to assess conformity with assigned amounts and the last  three are means to meet commitments.

On the design of a compliance system, many Parties stressed the  system's facilitative and preventative nature. The US emphasized  the importance of transparency and, with JAPAN, called for  reasonable certainty about the consequences of non-compliance.  AUSTRALIA, CANADA and the US called for a regime tailored to the  Kyoto Protocol, as it differs from other multilateral  environmental agreements. JAPAN said the system may need a short  grace period at the end of the commitment period. The EU said  the system should apply to all obligations under the Protocol.  It could also provide advice to Parties on implementation,  prevent disputes, and impose consequences, including sanctions,  if appropriate. With NEW ZEALAND, he stressed the importance of  due process and allowing the Parties involved to participate  fully. IRAN noted that Protocol Article 18 (non-compliance) does  not specify any particular articles, but applies to the entire  Protocol. He called on the COP to create a specific body for  non-compliance and said an expert review team does not have the  authority or capacity to determine non-compliance.

On institutional issues, the US noted a number of questions,  including: who could trigger the non-compliance mechanism;  whether one body would deal with both the facilitative and non- compliance aspects of the process; and whether the body would be  composed of Parties or be independent. The EU said compliance  processes should: operate through one supervisory body; function  through a single set of procedures; and provide for measures  that apply in a graduated manner. An independent committee of  experts from relevant fields should operate the body. The US  said the compliance system would apply to any obligation of the  Protocol but not to non-binding obligations. AOSIS cautioned  against attempting to differentiate legally binding from non- legally binding obligations, and IRAN underscored the legally- binding character of the Protocol. CHINA said Article 18 (non- compliance) applies to all obligations under the Protocol.  AUSTRALIA said a distinction between binding and non-binding  aspects would be necessary for practical reasons. AUSTRALIA and  JAPAN, opposed by the UNITED ARAB EMIRATES, stressed the  benefits of peer reviews, rather than a punitive regime, to  enforce obligations.

On consequences of non-compliance, all delegates emphasized the  preliminary character of their comments. The EU, supported by  JAPAN and AOSIS, noted its preference for a system that combines  'hard' and 'soft' enforcement measures that are graded according  to the gravity of the breach and the nature of the obligation.  CANADA referred to procedural steps leading to the application  of consequences as an integral part of the compliance system.  The US referred to prior agreement and a degree of automatic  application as requisites for binding consequences. She drew  attention to a provision in the Protocol (Article 6.1.c)  penalizing non-compliance by forbidding a Party to sell  emissions reduction units when not in compliance with its  obligations under Articles 5 (estimation of net emissions) and 7  (annual GHG inventories). The CENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL  ENVIRONMENTAL LAW proposed the use of a compliance fund. If  Parties reach the end of a commitment period and find that their  emissions, minus removals, exceed their assigned amount, they  would be obligated under the Protocol to purchase credits or  parts of assigned amount to cover their overage. However, if  there are insufficient credits or parts of assigned amount  available from the market, the required credits would have to be  purchased from the compliance fund, which would invest the money  in the highest quality emissions reduction and removal projects.

On Saturday, 5 June, the G-77/CHINA presented its position on  compliance to the JWG. She stated that only Parties that are in  compliance with their obligations and bound by a compliance  regime should be allowed to participate in the Protocol  mechanisms. Binding consequences for non-compliance are  essential, as they will enhance Parties' collective ability to  deter non-compliance. She said it may be desirable to identify  cases and/or activities that may constitute non-compliance. She  supported an indicative list of non-compliance consequences,  depending on the cause, type, degree and frequency of non- compliance, including: appropriate assistance; technical and  financial expertise and capacity building; issuing cautions;  suspension of rights such as the ability to participate in the  Protocol mechanisms; and, penalties, like financial penalties  for Annex B Parties. She said financial penalties resulting from  a non-compliance procedure should be made available to meet the  cost of adaptation. She circulated a list of questions on a  compliance system, including, what the principles should be that  guide the development of procedures to implement Article 18 of  the Protocol and what procedures and mechanisms under Article 18  entail binding consequences.

On Tuesday, 8 June, the Co-Chairs proposed a draft work  programme on compliance whereby the JWG invites Parties to make  submissions to the Secretariat in response to questions  contained in an annex to the proposal. These submissions will be  compiled in a miscellaneous document. The JWG also requests the  Co-Chairs to produce, for consideration by JWG-2, a synthesis of  Parties' proposals. The JWG also agrees that an informal  discussion on work under the SBI/SBSTA and experience under  other conventions would help Parties better understand the  compliance system needed. On the nature and timing of the  informal exchange, later referred to as a 'workshop,' the G-77/CHINA, supported by SAUDI ARABIA and IRAN, preferred holding  it after COP-5, but before the subsidiary bodies' 12th sessions  (SB-12). She said the discussion should have clearly defined  objectives and should not reach conclusions or form the basis  for any documents. Participants should primarily be government  experts. AOSIS suggested holding the discussions back-to-back  with COP-5. The EU, CANADA, the US and AUSTRALIA supported  holding it prior to COP-5 in order to better prepare for it.  Delegates continued debating the timing of the workshop while  discussing the JWG's draft report of the meeting in informal  consultations.

On Thursday, 10 June, the JWG adopted the report on its meetings  and agreed that the Co-Chairs will organize a workshop in early  October 1999. The purpose of the workshop will be to informally  exchange views on relevant issues, including experiences under  other conventions. The Co-Chairs will make a factual, informal  report, with no recommendations, on this workshop. The JWG urged  all Parties in a position to facilitate developing country  participation to make contributions. The workshop will be open  to Parties and observers. The JWG also agreed that a workshop is  needed after COP-5 and between SB-11 and SB-12. Responses to  questions on compliance, contained in an annex to the report,  are due by 1 August 1999.

In his report back to SBI/SBSTA, JWG Co-Chair Dovland reported  that the JWG had noted that the work on compliance is linked to  that on Protocol Articles 5 (methodology), 7 (communications),  and 8 (review of information). He said the JWG had noted the  need for exchange of information with the relevant groups and  discussed general issues related to a compliance system, such as  its objectives and characteristics. He said the group had  adopted a work programme and will consider at the next session  submissions by Parties based on questions annexed to the  conclusions. He announced that a first workshop to further  consider this issue would be held on 6-7 October 1999. He  thanked Germany and Austria for their offers to help organize  the workshop. Delegates accepted annexing the report of the JWG  to the report of the SBI.

# ACTIVITIES IMPLEMENTED JOINTLY (AIJ) - ACTIVITIES IMPLEMENTED  JOINTLY UNDER THE PILOT PHASE

Delegates considered AIJ under the pilot phase during a joint  SBI/SBSTA Plenary on Tuesday, 1 June. The G-77/CHINA and others  expressed concern at the lack of regional balance in the  distribution of pilot projects and said the AIJ project  experience internationally was inadequate for a meaningful  review. The AFRICAN GROUP and NORWAY called for capacity  building to remedy this, particularly in Africa. SWITZERLAND  called for the development of terms of reference for the review  of the pilot phase for consideration by COP-5. The US, with  JAPAN and GUATEMALA, said experiences gained from AIJ projects  could provide valuable lessons for the development of Protocol  mechanisms. She noted the need for a smooth transition from the  pilot phase to project-based mechanisms. COSTA RICA underscored  the role of AIJ projects in its sustainable development agenda,  and called on COP-5 to take a definitive decision on AIJ's  status. GUATEMALA, with BRAZIL, supported AIJ project  eligibility for CDM certification, if the project meets the  necessary criteria and, with RUSSIA, called for straightforward  guidelines for the certification system. IRAN opposed linking  AIJ with the CDM since it does not include a credit element and  lacks adequate reference to sustainable development.

Margaret Mukahanana (Zimbabwe) and Jos Delbeke (European  Community) conducted informal consultations on this agenda item.

Delegates considered and adopted the draft conclusions on this  item (FCCC/SB/1999/L.1) on Friday, 11 June. SBSTA and SBI  recognized that the AIJ pilot phase should provide developing  countries and those in transition with an opportunity to enhance  their capacity building, and give Parties an opportunity to gain  experience with AIJ. They agreed that the review of the pilot  phase should address, inter alia: the geographical distribution  of projects, particularly the lack of projects in Africa, and  analyze the contributing factors; contribution of projects to  capacity building and institutional strengthening of Parties,  particularly host country Parties; contribution to host  countries' sustainable development needs; assessment of  environmental benefits related to mitigation of climate change  that would not have occurred in the absence of AIJ and the  methods used to measure, monitor and independently verify these  emissions; and consideration of costs, including costs of  greenhouse gas reductions and transaction costs, and examination  of related methodologies. SBSTA and SBI decided to undertake a  comprehensive review of the AIJ pilot phase at SB-11 with a view  to preparing a recommendation to COP-5 on further steps.

# MECHANISMS PURSUANT TO ARTICLES 6 (JOINT IMPLEMENTATION),  12(CLEAN DEVELOPMENT MECHANISM) AND 17(EMISSIONS TRADING) OF THE  KYOTO PROTOCOL

Delegates discussed issues related to the Protocol mechanisms in  a joint SBI/SBSTA contact group chaired by SBSTA Chair Chow. The  group was unable to start substantive deliberations until the  second week when the G-77/CHINA circulated its position paper.  In the substantive discussions, delegates stated their positions  and identified points of convergence and divergence on specific  elements of the synthesis of proposals by Parties on principles,  modalities, rules and guidelines on the CDM, JI and emissions  trading (FCCC/SB/1999/INF.2 and Add. 1-3).

In an initial exchange of views during the first joint Plenary  session on Tuesday, 1 June, the G-77/CHINA stressed the need to,  inter alia: begin with formulating principles to guide the  methodological and operational process; establish a common  understanding of the mechanisms; and ensure that the nature and  scope of mechanisms do not perpetuate North-South inequities.

The EU stressed the need to ensure that the mechanisms are  supplemental to domestic action and do not undermine commitments  under the Protocol. She advocated a properly defined ceiling  that will encourage Annex B countries to define strong policies  and measures. The US, JAPAN, AUSTRALIA, the RUSSIAN FEDERATION,  NORWAY, NEW ZEALAND and CANADA opposed the EU proposal to place  caps on the use of the Protocol mechanisms. They said, inter  alia, that the proposal would re-open the 'package' agreed in  Kyoto, reduce the flow of new resources to developing countries,  impede the cost effectiveness of the mechanisms, hinder wider  acceptance of the Protocol by domestic constituencies, and  create a double standard by not clarifying how it applies to  Protocol Article 4 (EU 'bubble'). The AFRICAN GROUP supported  setting caps on the use of mechanisms to meet Protocol  commitments and said that CDM should avoid replicating the  inequitable regional distribution of projects experienced during  the AIJ pilot phase. AOSIS said actions under the mechanisms  should be supplemental to domestic action and, with SENEGAL,  suggested that the mechanisms be guided by principles of equity  and transparency.

SWITZERLAND proposed a post-verification system for emissions  trading that will allow Parties to trade only the excess of  assigned amount units. Supported by KAZAKHSTAN, he proposed that  JI begins prior to 2008.

The International Chamber of Commerce reported on a recent CDM  workshop held in Dakar, Senegal. The workshop conclusions  highlighted, inter alia, that: the CDM should act as a catalyst  for sustainable development; studies on Protocol mechanisms  should be extended to all African countries; a wide spectrum of  projects and private sector involvement should be promoted; and  capacity building of negotiators, companies, potential  certifiers and others involved in the CDM should be encouraged.

On Tuesday, 8 June, the G-77/CHINA introduced its position  papers on CDM, JI and emissions trading. Outlining the paper on  CDM, the G-77/CHINA highlighted CDM's role in helping developing  countries achieve sustainable development and developed  countries comply with their QELROs. He stressed the need to  decide on principles before addressing methodological issues and  suggested creating an adaptation fund. The G-77/CHINA  recommended that its paper form the basis for future  negotiations. In support, CHINA identified issues missing from  the Secretariat's synthesis report but covered in the G-77/China  paper, including transparency and climate change effectiveness.  He said discussions should focus on the clusters - principles,  methodologies and institutional issues - recommended in the  Buenos Aires Plan of Action. At the Chair's request, however,  the Group proceeded to focus discussions on various elements of  the synthesis papers on the different mechanisms.

### CLEAN DEVELOPMENT MECHANISM

On the objectives, principles and  purposes of the CDM, the EU identified convergence on various  areas, including cost effectiveness, transparency and equity,  and divergence on issues, such as inter-tradeability between the  mechanisms. The US identified the areas of convergence as being  those that recognize, inter alia, private sector participation  in the CDM and the need for baseline determination to precede  use of the mechanisms. PERU recommended a common baseline for JI  and the CDM. She said such an approach would, inter alia:  provide a simple, transparent and reliable methodology for  common baseline application, as the regional average of Annex II  in energy and other sectors would constitute the calculation  basis; and ensure environmental integrity in emissions  reductions.

Regarding legal entities, the EU identified convergence on the  involvement of both public and private entities in CDM  activities but added that Parties should be responsible for  fulfilling their Protocol commitments. She said the COP/MOP  should designate operational entities. NORWAY, supported by  CANADA, said operational entities were a key element for the  CDM's institutional structure. He added that they should be  drawn from the private sector and be independent, centralized  and accredited by the Executive Board. On project eligibility,  the US stressed the need for a comprehensive approach to  certification and verification, including options for baselines.  The G-77/CHINA said project eligibility is central to the  principle, nature and scope of the CDM. NORWAY noted that there  was no section on baselines in the synthesis report. The  REPUBLIC OF KOREA said project eligibility and baselines are  essential in formulating CDM rules. He said eligible projects  should demonstrate GHG reduction, and investment, financial and  technology additionality.

Regarding the contribution to sustainable development, the G-77/CHINA said the recipient country should be the sole judge of  whether a project meets its sustainable development priorities.  The EU suggested that non-Annex I Parties confirm in writing how  a project will help it achieve sustainable development and  stressed that the project activity should be consistent with all  international agreements to which the Parties involved belong.  CHINA suggested applying a similar condition to the funding  country to confirm how the CDM would result in certified  emissions reductions (CERs).

On sequestration, the G-77/CHINA said discussions should be  avoided until the conclusion of ongoing studies by SBSTA and the  IPCC. The EU stated its preference for excluding consideration  of sequestration pending a COP decision.

On technology transfer and project financing, the G-77/CHINA  highlighted the dimension of additionality, a feature absent in  the Chair's draft. He said funding for CDM projects should be  additional to GEF, ODA and other developed country financial  commitments. The US identified convergence on the CDM's role in  facilitating technology transfer.

On supplementarity, the G-77/CHINA highlighted the primacy of  domestic action and recommended the development of guidelines on  supplementarity. The EU restated its proposal for a concrete  ceiling and the US noted possible divergence on the issue.

Regarding levies, the G-77/CHINA highlighted establishing an  adaptation fund. The US questioned how this fund would be  managed and its proceeds dispersed. On CERs, the G-77/CHINA  suggested discussing them in the context of the CDM's purposes.

On further work on CDM, the G-77/CHINA stressed addressing  principles and basic elements that are currently not featured in  the synthesis report. The US identified convergence on, inter  alia, the need for work on baselines and share of proceeds. The  EU highlighted monitoring, verification, certification and  validation.

In the discussion on capacity building, the G-77/CHINA  underscored its significance and, supported by PERU, said  capacity building should be incorporated into all CDM projects  to enhance endogenous expertise to identify technology needs and  capacities for assimilation of technology. He urged attention to  the special needs of least developed countries. The PHILIPPINES  stressed that capacity-building initiatives should be country- driven and within the intergovernmental process. CHINA said  capacity building should be 'of, for and in' the developing  country. The AFRICAN GROUP underscored the importance of an  integrated approach to capacity building and called for guidance  from the subsidiary bodies to UN agencies working on such  activities. The EU suggested coordinating the various capacity- building initiatives so as to optimize resource use. PERU  highlighted the beneficial nature of regional discussions on  CDM. SENEGAL suggested involving the financial sector,  sensitizing the public and decision makers and training  developing country officials.

### JOINT IMPLEMENTATION

On the structure, purpose and principles  of JI, the G-77/CHINA noted its submission on elements that  should be addressed to enable the COP/MOP to elaborate  guidelines. They include, inter alia, participation of Parties  in Article 6 (JI) projects, supplementarity, climate change  effectiveness, transparency, criteria for project baselines and  guidelines for monitoring, verification and reporting. CHINA  suggested focusing on cluster issues, including: principles,  purpose, nature and scope; methodological issues; and  institutional issues. The EU suggested including appendices on  technical issues such as baselines and monitoring. SWITZERLAND  inquired about a date for early crediting, noting the lack of  clarity in the case of JI. The EU stated that there is no  provision for it in the Protocol. JAPAN noted convergence on  environmental and cost effectiveness, equity and transparency.  The US emphasized that JI differed from the CDM, since it does  not share the goal of promoting sustainable development.

On Parties participating in JI, the EU said they should have  ratified the Protocol and be bound by a compliance regime. On  the involvement of legal entities, she noted the impact they may  have on a Party's responsibilities under Protocol Article 3  (QELROs).

Regarding project eligibility, the EU identified convergence on  a two-step approach in JI, validation before implementation and  certification of emissions reductions, and in elements relating  to assessment of additionality. However, she noted diverging  views on the methodology for determining baselines. JAPAN  preferred addressing initiation of JI projects along with  project eligibility and said many countries did not concur with  the two-step approach. The US underlined the need to ensure  environmental additionality of JI projects.

Concerning project monitoring, the EU said participants should  provide information on their provisions for systematic, accurate  and periodic monitoring and submit the necessary monitoring data  to show that the project has resulted in quantifiable and long- term reductions.

On the definition of emissions reduction units (ERUs), the US  noted convergence on how to denominate, serialize and track  ERUs, and reiterated the need to recognize that procedures used  elsewhere may not be appropriate for constructing JI. The US  also said the registry was an important element to ensure  accurate reporting, tracking, and compliance.

On the relationship of JI to the AIJ pilot phase, the US,  supported by the EU, said AIJ activities might be eligible for  JI if they fulfill the rules and requirements set for such  projects. Regarding supplementarity, the EU restated its  proposal for a concrete ceiling on the use of all three  mechanisms.

### EMISSIONS TRADING

On the objectives, principles and purpose of  emissions trading, the G-77/CHINA reiterated the need to address  principles and basic elements before dealing with methodological  and operational issues. He said environmental integrity must be  inherent in the system, which should not freeze or perpetuate  existing inequities between Annex B and developing countries. He  stressed that the Protocol had not created any right, title or  entitlement and said emissions trading should be restricted to  excess limitations and reductions additional to a country's  commitment. CHINA said the synthesis of proposals on emissions  trading contained several extraneous elements, such as  competitiveness and market size, and called for a revised  synthesis. The PHILIPPINES distinguished emissions trading from  other mechanisms and stressed that it did not imply a right to  pollute but an obligation to reduce GHGs. The EU identified  divergence on interchangeability between CERs and ERUs, and,  with JAPAN, noted convergence on cost effectiveness,  environmental benefits, equity and transparency. With the G-77/CHINA and the US, the EU said the Protocol did not create  property rights, and stated that emissions trading was a way of  fulfilling obligations under the Protocol. AOSIS, with the  AFRICAN GROUP, highlighted the need for adaptation surcharges to  be assessed against all the Protocol mechanisms.

On the definition of units, CANADA noted divergence on the  concept of fungibility among the Protocol mechanisms. Regarding  the sections on competitiveness, market size and structure,  relationship to domestic policies, and liability for sales of  non-surplus units, the G-77/CHINA said such headings are not  neutral and recommended changing them. CANADA said reference to  'competitiveness' should be changed to 'access to emissions  trading.' On market size and structure, the RUSSIAN FEDERATION  suggested either defining or deleting the term 'hot air' in the  text. Regarding levies, the EU noted some divergence regarding  liability for sales of non-surplus units.

### JOINT CONTACT GROUP CONCLUSIONS

Chair Chow said he would  redraft the documents based on Parties' comments, and asked for  new submissions to be provided by 1 July 1999. The G-77/China  urged a later deadline for submissions. The EU asked for  additional time to complete its technical work in producing  draft appendices. Chair Chow said he would extend the deadline  for the technical submission to 1 August, and would consult with  Parties on the suggested 1 July deadline.

On Friday, 11 June, delegates adopted the draft conclusions  (FCCC/SB/1999/CRP.4) of the SBI and SBSTA Chairs on the Protocol  mechanisms. In these conclusions, SBI and SBSTA invited the  Parties to submit further proposals by 31 July on issues raised  in the Buenos Aires Plan of Action relating to principles,  modalities and guidelines for the mechanisms, and elements to be  included in the plan to facilitate capacity building. They  requested the Chairs, with the Secretariat, to prepare a revised  and consolidated synthesis of proposals taking into account the  views and submissions of the Parties.

SBSTA Chair Chow noted that a synthesis document and a  miscellaneous document will be prepared, and stated that  submissions for further proposals received from Parties before  the deadline will be available by 15 September 1999. He added  that submissions of a technical nature may be synthesized into a  new document or included together with late submissions in a  miscellaneous document. The G-77/CHINA stressed the need to  address the principles and basic elements in the structure in  order to guide the methodological and institutional aspects of  the mechanisms' design.

# FINAL JOINT SBI/SBSTA PLENARY

The subsidiary bodies met in a final joint session on Friday, 11  June, to consider the report of the Joint Working Group on  procedures and mechanisms relating to compliance, and adopt  draft conclusions on AIJ under the pilot phase and the Protocol  mechanisms.

The BUSINESS COUNCIL FOR SUSTAINABLE ENERGY discussed the AIJ  pilot phase. He stated that the pilot phase has played a  valuable role in assisting developed and developing countries to  understand project-based approaches and encouraged Parties that  have not participated in the pilot phase to do so now. He added  that the evaluation of the AIJ pilot phase will be useful in  designing the CDM. SBSTA Chair Chow thanked participants and  declared the joint meetings of the SBSTA and SBI closed.

# A BRIEF ANALYSIS OF THE MEETING

### 'INVISIBLE BRACKETS' WILL  LITTER THE PATH TO COP-6

On the final day of the tenth sessions of the subsidiary bodies,  FCCC Executive Secretary Michael Zammit Cutajar drew a useful  distinction between those agenda items where consensus exists  and constructive technical discussion could proceed and those  where Parties remain divided. As if enclosed in 'invisible  brackets,' some issues remain hotly contested, although agreed  to in the broad language of the Protocol. These issues, such as  land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) and a ceiling on  the use of the Protocol mechanisms, contributed to the lack of  progress at this meeting and could likely impede future  sessions. This analysis will characterize the new post-Kyoto  stage of the negotiations, identify some of the subsequent  issues regarding the direction of upcoming negotiations, and  present an overview of issues within invisible brackets.

# WE ARE ALL CHILDREN OF KYOTO NOW

There was a genuine sense of disappointment among negotiators  during the first week and a half of the subsidiary bodies'  proceedings, stemming largely from the G-77/China's need to take  time to complete its internal discussions on issues such as the  Protocol mechanisms and compliance. The heavy technical and  procedural focus of the agenda was dominated by the schedule set  out in the Buenos Aires Plan of Action, which, because of its  generous timelines, allows Parties to defer consideration of  substantive issues, at least for the time being. This, combined  with the efforts of some Parties to postpone contentious issues  beyond the upcoming COP, added to a distinct absence of any  sense of occasion. Little surprise that SBI Chair Kante  described the meetings as 'technical' and predicted that COP-5  would see more of the same.

Post-Kyoto negotiations will continue to witness a slowing down  in pace for a number of reasons, aside from the need to resolve  issues trapped in invisible brackets. First, the new phase in  negotiations is undertaking the work of institutionalizing the  outcomes from Kyoto, a task that should not be underestimated in  its complexity. The workload to tackle the complexity of issues  derived from Kyoto Protocol was reflected in discussions on the  programme budget for the 2000-2001 biennium. In its original  proposal, the Secretariat foresaw a 50% increase with respect to  the budget for the previous biennium. Although Parties did not  agree to an increase of this nature, they did acknowledge the  added burdens derived from pending Kyoto Protocol issues.

While there will be a temptation to criticize the apparent  slowing-down in the pace of developments, it is to be expected  and may, in retrospect, come to be viewed as a welcome signal of  a routinization of the process. Another reason is that, however  effective the negotiating process, progress on design and  implementation of far-reaching instruments such as the Kyoto  mechanisms should not outpace the ability of those Parties with  low capacity to absorb and calculate the likely impact and  opportunities for their respective countries and regions. The G-77/China is entitled to argue for all the time it requires to  engage effectively in the negotiations, not in the least because  their futures and the future of global equity are once more  intimately bound up with decision-making in the ecologically- indebted industrialized countries. Finally, the inexorable  penetration of the FCCC and Kyoto Protocol's impact on domestic  policy and constituencies will influence negotiations, adding  new calculations to be taken on board during international  negotiations. The upcoming US Presidential election is only one  prominent example of the domestic-international interaction that  must be factored into the negotiations by all concerned.

# NEGOTIATORS ARE ON A STEEP LEARNING CURVE

The climate change negotiations highlight an inevitable tension  between a United Nations framework characterized by conventional  and well-rehearsed rhetoric and the unprecedented demands placed  on the system by the scope of the FCCC and Kyoto Protocol.  Sweden's veteran negotiator, Bo Kjellén, rarely misses an  opportunity to remind participants that they are engaged in an  agenda that must ultimately re-programme the genetic codes of a  civilization. Facilitating negotiators on their steep learning  curve has been the subject of some discussion, notably the role  of the Secretariat. In a departure from tradition, future  negotiations on LULUCF will include a workshop as part of the  formal subsidiary body deliberations, in response to expressions  of frustration that too little time is available for detailed  exchanges within the traditional negotiation format. The IPCC  will also continue to use the side events at the Subsidiary  Bodies' meetings to provide detailed briefings on its work.

# PROGRESS REPORT

Progress on key controversial issues such as global  participation, mechanisms, land use, land use change and  forestry, and national communications proved to be patchy.  Substantive discussions were simply put on hold and are unlikely  to advance before COP-6.

###     Global participation:

The over-arching issue of global  participation (some speak of 'voluntary commitments') remained  alive at the subsidiary bodies' meetings and is expected to be  the subject of early debate at COP-5. Some of the most  interesting debates about global participation took place at two  side events, one organized by the World Resources Institute  (WRI) and the Stockholm Environment Institute. Argentina's  delegation was represented at both and, together with other  senior participants in the process, expressed interest in a  proposal from WRI to overcome the stalemate created by the  timing and nature of the debate on voluntary commitments for  non-Annex I countries. WRI believes that the stalemate has  developed in part from an assumption that a developing country  commitment would take the same basic form as an Annex I  commitment, namely a limitation on the absolute level of GHG  emissions expressed as a growth cap. An alternative form of  participation for developing countries would involve lowering  the GHG intensity of their economies rather than measuring  absolute emissions. WRI has pointed out that among developing  countries there is no discernible relationship between carbon  intensity and level of development.

###     Protocol Mechanisms:

Controversial debates on mechanisms flared  within the G-77/China. The group, though under pressure from the  Joint Working Group on mechanisms to resolve its differences and  formulate a position, dissolved into persistent regional  positions on various aspects of the CDM. The concepts of  'unilateral CDMs,' 'tradeability of CERs,' 'emissions avoidance'  and 'adaptation funds' teased the G-77/China negotiators for  over a week before they emerged with a document that was  skillfully and carefully constructed to be open-ended on most  issues. With the benefits from the CDM flowing unevenly to  different countries within the G-77/China and the lack of a  significant incentive to compromise on national positions, the  key issues are yet to be resolved within the G-77/China.

The EU welcomed progress on this issue during the last three  days of the meetings and noted that they had moved further  forward than initially expected. The EU and the Umbrella Group  (a fluid group of non-EU Annex I countries) observed a truce on  the hotly disputed question of a ceiling on the use of the  mechanisms. For the EU it is a case of 'once bitten twice shy'  as negotiators, convinced that some weak agreements (e.g.,  sinks, hot air, extra gases) were allowed to slip through in  Kyoto, now proceed with more caution than ever. Added to this is  the conventional wisdom that unresolved political differences  are so fundamental that a premature debate could 'derail the  process.' The ceiling and definition of 'supplementarity' represent the  most obvious examples of issues that remain enclosed in notional  brackets. The EU proposed a set of formulae to establish a  ceiling. They would, in effect, limit the use of the mechanisms  to meeting up to half of the effort required of Annex B Parties  and include a degree of flexibility for further use, provided  that any additional use is matched by an equivalent domestic  effort.

National communications from Annex I Parties: NGOs have  expressed concern about attempts by some Parties to remove or  downplay important elements of the guidelines for national  reporting given the importance of data for monitoring compliance  with the Protocol. The US attempted to remove or shift elsewhere  elements of the reporting requirements on 'energy intensity per  unit of GDP,' 'emissions per capita' and 'GDP per capita.'

### NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS FROM NON-ANNEX I PARTIES

While some  Parties hoped for more submissions of non-Annex I communications  in time for the first synthesis report, non-Annex I Parties were  of the view that submission of their national communications is  subject to the availability of financial resources and technical  support. Thus, timing for non-Annex I communications and  advancing towards second guidelines were some of the points of  contention. Proposals for technical assessments of these  communications to identify information gaps were perceived by  some developing countries as attempts to prepare the grounds for  new developing country commitments. Proof of diverging views on  the future of non-Annex I communications within the Convention,  was the inability to agree on a contingency budget for matters  related to the consideration of non-Annex I communications.

###     land use, land-use change and forestry:

The EU believes it has  held the line on the central debate over the work programme on  LULUCF. They think the JUSCANZ group attempted to develop a  parallel process and speed up the work timetable to preempt the  forthcoming IPCC Special Report. At the same time, some JUSCANZ  Parties demonstrated a reluctance to provide timely and  important data in Protocol Articles 3.3 and 3.4 (QELROs), which  would assist the IPCC in assessing the implications of future  decisions on the inclusion of certain activities under the  LULUCF provisions. The negotiations therefore seemed to confirm  NGO suspicions that methodological debates are being used to  erode Annex B commitments. New research from Greenpeace  International, issued at the close of the meeting, appears to  confirm NGOs' worst suspicions. An updated analysis of the  potential loopholes in the Kyoto Protocol ('hot air' and the  CDM, proposed additional articles under Article 3.4, forestry  activities under Article 3.3) shows that the proposals on the  table at Bonn could completely undermine the Protocol's already  limited environmental effectiveness. Virtually no action would  be needed by Annex B Parties to 'meet' the commitments.

# HASTENING SLOWLY?

COP-5 will not take place in Jordan, as announced in Buenos  Aires. Instead it will take place in Bonn, a modest city of  gentle pace and routine. It is an altogether understated  location. Yet Bonn will be an appropriate venue for COP-5, which  has already been described as essentially another 'technical'  meeting on the way to the bigger prize of COP-6. COP-5 will set  the stage for the further emergence and clarification of  political issues and hopefully the final removal of the  'invisible brackets' at COP-6. The iron law of negotiation is  that minimum levels of 'negotiating capital' must be accumulated  and reserved until the final round.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR

### WORKSHOP ON RENEWABLE ENERGY FOR THE DEVELOPING WORLD

A  workshop on 'Renewable Energy for the Developing World' will be  held from 28 June - 2 July 1999, in Carbondale, Colorado, USA.  For more information, contact: Solar Energy International; tel:  +1-970-963-8855; fax: +1-970-963-8866; e-mail:  sei@solarenergy.org; Internet:  http://www.solarenergy.org/solarck.html.

### AOSIS MEETING ON THE CDM

The AOSIS meeting on the CDM will be  held from 13-16 July 1999 in Majuro, Marshall Islands. For more  information, contact: e-mail: rmiun@aol.com.

### AIR POLLUTION CONFERENCE

The International Conference on  Modelling, Monitoring and Management of Air Pollution will be  held from 27-29 July 1999 in San Francisco, California, USA. For  more information, contact: the Conference Secretariat, AIR  POLLUTION 99, Wessex Institute of Technology, Ashurst,  Southampton, SO40 7AA, UK; tel: +44 (0) 1703 293223; fax: +44  (0) 1703 29285; e-mail: wit@wessex.ac.uk; Internet: http://www.wessex.ac.uk/.

### INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON NON-C02 GREENHOUSE GASES

The  International Symposium on Non-CO2 Greenhouse Gases: Scientific  Understanding, Control, and Implementation, will be held in  Noordwijkerhout, the Netherlands, from 8-10 September 1999. For  more information, contact: Symposium Bureau; e-mail:  j.vanham@plant.nl; Internet: http://pubsys.wolters- kluwer.com/MWEB/deelnermers/100007514.html.

### SECOND ANNUAL EARTH TECHNOLOGIES FORUM

The Second Annual Earth  Technologies Forum will be held in Washington, DC, from 27-29  September 1999. For more information, contact: Erika Fischer;  tel: +1-703-807-4052; fax: +1-703-243-2874; Internet:  http://www.earthforum.com/.

### INSTITUTE FOR GLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL STRATEGIES TECHNICAL WORKSHOP  ON CDM

This workshop will be held in October 1999 in Hamaya,  Japan. For more information, contact: Aki Maruyama, IGES, 1560- 39 Kamiyamaguchi, Hayama, Kanagawa, 240-0198, Japan; tel: +81- 468-55-3812; e-mail: maruyama@iges.or.jp.

### INTERNATIONAL SEMINAR ON KYOTO MECHANISMS BUSINESS  OPPORTUNITIES

'Kyoto Mechanisms Business Opportunities: How  Much is a Project Worth? Selection, Verification and  Certification of Projects,' will be held in Basel, Switzerland,  from 21-22 October 1999. For more information, contact: Wolfram  Kaegi, Institute for Economy and the Environment, University of  St. Gallen, Tigerbergstrasse 2, CH-9000 St. Gallen, Switzerland;  tel: +41-71-224-2583; fax: +41-71-224-2722; e-mail:  Wolfram.Kaegi@unisg.ch; Internet:  http://www.iwoe.unisg.ch/kyoto/.

### FOURTH INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS ON ENERGY, ENVIRONMENT &  TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION

The 4th International Congress on  Energy, Environment & Technological Innovation will be held from  20-24 October 1999 in Rome, Italy. For more information,  contact: EETI99, Facolta di Ingegneria, Via Eudossiana 18, 00184  Rome, Italy; fax: +39-6-4883235; Internet:  http://www.ing.ucv.ve/ceait/eeti.htm.

### FCCC FIFTH MEETING OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES

COP-5 will  be held from 25 October - 5 November 1999 at the Maritim Hotel  in Bonn, Germany. The technical workshop on FCCC Article 4.8 and  4.9 (adverse effects) is scheduled for 22-24 September. A  workshop on compliance is scheduled from 6-7 October. For more  information, contact: the FCCC Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815- 1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.de;  Internet: http://www.unfccc.de/.

### CONVENTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICATION

COP-3 of the CCD is  scheduled to meet in Recife, Brazil, from 15-26 November 1999.  For more information, contact: the CCD Secretariat, P.O. Box  260129, D-53153 Bonn, Germany; tel: +49-228-815-2800; fax: +49- 228-815-2899; e-mail: secretariat@unccd.de; Internet:  http://www.unccd.de.

### MONTREAL PROTOCOL MEETING OF THE PARTIES

The 11th Meeting of  the Parties to the Montreal Protocol will be held in Beijing,  China, from 29 November - 3 December 1999. For more information,  contact: the Secretariat; tel: +254-2-62-1234; fax: +254-2-62- 3601; e-mail: ozoneinfo@unep.org; Internet:  http://www.unep.org/ozone/.