---
title: "HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE MEETINGS OF THE FCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES, 24-25 OCTOBER 1997"
id: enb1261e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1261e
date: 1997-10-25
abstract: "Delegates to the eighth session of the Ad Hoc Group on the  Berlin Mandate (AGBM-8) held 'non-group' meetings Friday on  quantified emission limitation and reduction objectives  (QELROs) and policies and measures. The seventh session of  the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technical Advice  (SBSTA-7) considered: cooperation with international  organizations; the roster of experts; activities  implemented jointly (AIJ); technology transfer; national  communications and methodological issues. The Chair of the  AGBM convened a briefing for observers. AGBM non-groups  continued their discussions on Saturday, 25 October.."
---

# OBSERVER BRIEFING

Luiz Gylvan Meira Filho (Brazil), Chair of the non-group on  QELROs, reported that the group had looked at relevant  paragraphs in the consolidated negotiating text in  numerical order. He reported agreement among delegates that  the first paragraph of the article on QELROs should be  simple in stating and introducing commitments. He indicated  that there had been a discussion on the legal implications  of listing commitments within the text of the protocol or  legally binding instrument or under a separate appendix or  attachment. The concern was whether furthering commitments  in the future would require Parties to ratify amendments to  the protocol or legally binding instrument .

He said consensus was emerging that a balance should be  struck whereby the legally binding nature of commitments  would not be undermined by the adoption of more informal  amendment procedures. He noted that the issue would be  taken up by the non-group on institutions and mechanisms.  He also said that some delegations wanted to emphasize the  importance of GHG sinks, while others said that IPCC  methodologies for calculating their efficiency are marked  by a high level of uncertainty. He said criteria for sinks  had been discussed, including measures to enhance them and  their absorption capacity.

Evans King (Trinidad and Tobago), Chair of the non-group on  Article 4.1, reported that the group had considered  paragraphs on advancing commitments without introducing new  ones for non-Annex I Parties, the preparation and periodic  updating of national inventories of GHG emissions and  removals, and IPCC methodologies. He said a contact group  dealt with the most difficult matters.

Takao Shibata (Japan), Chair of the non-group on  institutions and mechanisms, said that there seemed to be a  broad understanding that the COP would be the governing  body of the Protocol, that institutional economy should  guide structural arrangements and that Protocol  institutions should be distinctive.

# SUBSIDIARY BODIES FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE

IPCC Chair emeritus Bert Bolin highlighted recent results  of the Panel's work. He said climate inertia and the long  life of gases means that the full effects of past emissions  will occur even if future emissions are reduced, slowing  the effect of emissions reductions. Even if Annex-I  countries reduce emissions 30-90 percent, global emissions  would reach two to three times 1990 levels. He said a slow  start is difficult to correct later. He also noted large  margins of error in calculating natural sources and sinks,  such that an accurate calculation for terrestrial sources  and sinks is not presently possible. Because deteriorating  global observation networks may handicap future science on  climate change, he proposed that the COP assess needs to  maintain the networks.

IPCC Chair Robert Watson summarized the Panel's report on  regional impacts, noting that it assesses vulnerability to  climate change because the ability to predict impacts for  specific places and times is limited. The report covers 10  regions. Among the key conclusions are: ecosystems,  especially forests and coral reefs, are highly sensitive to  climate change; billions of people could be impacted by  exacerbated problems in drinking water supply, sanitation,  and drought; food production could decrease in the tropics  and subtropics, despite steady global production;  significantly adverse effects on small island states and  low-lying deltas such as in Bangladesh, Egypt and China  could displace tens of millions of people with one meter of  sea-level rise; heat stress mortality and vector-borne  diseases could increase; and that most effects are negative  for the most vulnerable developing countries.

Among regional findings, he noted: that Africa is most  vulnerable because poverty limits the capacity for  adaptation; that arid western Asia and Australia could face  exacerbated water scarcity; that vulnerable systems face  multiple stresses in Latin America; that changes could  challenge adaptation even in natural forests and water  resources in parts of North America; and that sea level  rise threatens cultures if not elimination of small island  states. He said the Third Assessment Report (TAR) would  focus on regional impacts, have chapters on science,  impacts and adaptation, and mitigation, and include a  policymaker synthesis report.

CANADA, MALAYSIA and the MARSHALL ISLANDS said the COP  should address the decline of global observation networks,  while SAUDI ARABIA had reservations. The US said the  findings emphasize the need for developing countries'  participation and that their vulnerability underscores the  urgency of action. The International Civil Aviation  Organization, not SBSTA, should deal with aviation  decisions. The MARSHALL ISLANDS said the vulnerability  report was a 'death sentence' for small island states, and  that the TAR must clarify scenarios and determine what is  dangerous. CHINA said because predictions for 100 year  scenarios are unreliable, it is impossible for developing  countries to adopt actions for the next 100 years.

ZIMBABWE introduced a report on a joint SBSTA/IPCC meeting  on the IPCC's Third Assessment Report (TAR). The joint  meeting was informed of the IPCC's decisions regarding the  scope, structure, content, timing and dissemination of the  TAR. The Chair invited comments on the report of the  SBSTA/IPCC session, reminding delegations that the IPCC has  invited guidance on policy-relevant questions. The US  supported the addition of a chapeau, noting the closeness  of SBSTA's final session to the deadline for submissions to  the IPCC. On additional policy relevant questions to be  addressed, Parties made the following suggestions: a  reference to additional gases that are believed to have a  radiative forcing impact, and the importance of monitoring  the adequacy of the systematic observation system (US); the  use of non-English language references in support of IPCC  reports (MONGOLIA); and explanations of the range of  uncertainty in IPCC findings (MALAYSIA). The Chair  announced an informal meeting of SBSTA and IPCC experts.

The Chair invited comments on draft conclusions on the  Roster of Experts (Item 7). The NETHERLANDS said the  essence of the draft conclusions is a request to the  Secretariat to continue using the roster for methodological  and technical guidance and an invitation to prepare an  evaluation before COP-5. The draft conclusions also deal  with: intergovernmental technical advisory panels (ITAPS);  expansion of the roster in the field of methodologies; the  criteria to be used when utilizing members of the roster; a  review of the standardized form for collecting information  on nominees; and a request that the Secretariat report on  criteria used for selection. The Chair invited interested  Parties to reformulate references to regional  representation . SAUDI ARABIA expressed concerns about the  possibility of important tasks being dominated by one  region. The PHILIPPINES introduced an amendment on criteria  for using roster members, ensuring that the element of  capacity building is fully respected. MALAYSIA said SBSTA  could request, not authorize, the Secretariat to continue  using the roster.

On AIJ, the Co-Chair of the contact group reported that the  group had worked from proposals by the US, Norway and  Switzerland, which the co-Chair tried to incorporate. The  G-77/CHINA requested more time and later submitted a new  proposal. Delegates agreed to allow more time for the  contact group to reach consensus.

The Co-Chair of the contact group on technology transfer  reported that the group could not complete its work. The  group considered proposals from the G-77/CHINA. Delegates  also discussed draft conclusions on national communications  from Annex I Parties produced by the SBSTA and SBI Chairs,  as well as a draft decision on methodological issues.

NON-GROUP ON QELROs-2 The new non-group on QELROs chaired by Bo Kjéllen (Sweden)  discussed an article in the consolidated negotiating text  on the establishment of base years or periods for the  implementation of commitments by Annex I Parties undergoing  transition to a market economy. A proposal by a group of  countries to delete the paragraph met objection. A country,  representing Annex I Parties with economies in transition,  introduced a proposal to allow flexibility in the  establishment of baselines. A regional group indicated that  flexibility was acceptable as long as the agreed text  provided a degree of certainty. The non-group also  addressed articles on emissions borrowing and banking for  Annex I Parties or Parties who undertake voluntary  commitments. While a group of countries objected to these  flexibility mechanisms, one country indicated that its  QELROs would depend on them. Others supported the view that  banking or 'saving' emissions from one budget period for  the next was acceptable, while borrowing was not..

NON-GROUP ON QELROs-1 The QELROs-1 non-group chaired by Luiz Gylvan Meira Filho  (Brazil) met in the afternoon and discussed flat rate and  differentiated targets. The Chair characterized the flat  rate approach as the majority view and suggested that  Parties favoring differentiation propose an Annex C. Two  countries rejected the characterization made by the Chair.  Some countries considered that Annex C and the attachment  should not be discussed until the issue of differentiation  is settled. The Chair proposed adding text to the first  paragraph of the article on QELROS to the effect that Annex  I countries 'shall ensure' that they will meet the agreed  target. A delegation questioned the meaning of language in  a paragraph suggesting that Annex I countries should make  'demonstrable progress' by 2005, while a regional group  expressed its preference for a specific target in that year  and another delegation objected to the paragraph.

# NON-GROUP ON POLICIES AND MEASURES

The non-group on policies and measures (P&Ms) met in the  afternoon and further considered proposals from two groups  of countries. Some delegates reported little movement in  positions. A contact group was formed to discuss a  paragraph under which Parties would aim to implement P&Ms  in specified priority areas. Another group was formed to  consider paragraphs on cooperating to enhance the  individual and combined effectiveness of P&Ms and on  developing common performance indicators.

# SATURDAY SESSIONS

The QELROs-2 non-group discussed emissions trading and  joint implementation. One group of countries proposed  deleting references to both items, while some developing  countries within that group suggested that the COP could  establish a pilot phase for these activities. An Annex II  country supported the existing text .A regional group said  its position on these mechanisms was contingent upon QELROs  decisions. QELROs-1 discussed the inclusion of GHGs and  sink categories in an Annex. On country said that all gases  should be included in the protocol and an Annex was  unnecessary. The Chair indicated that no decision had been  reached on including all gases. One delegation proposed a  separate annex for sinks. The non-group also discussed  national systems for the estimation of emissions and sinks.  One delegation considered that these national reporting  systems should be established for all gases, while others  considered they should be limited to gases covered in the  protocol. Two delegations said that countries should be  able to use methodologies other than IPCC ones. A contact  group was established on Global Warming Potentials (GWPs).

In the institutions and mechanisms non-group, there was  broad agreement that the COP should serve as the 'Meeting  of the Parties.' Delegates debated whether distinct costs  of Secretariat services for the protocol should be met by  the Parties thereto.There was general agreement on the  multilateral consultative process.Three delegations  objected to a provision allowing amendments to the protocol  under a three-quarters majority vote. In the Article 4.1  non-group, an article on national reporting, a group of  countries proposed deleting 'voluntary commitments,' and  proposed a penalty fund. Other delegations strongly  disagreed with both proposals

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### AGBM

AGBM is scheduled to meet in Plenary at 10:00 am.

Non-Group on QELROs: This non-group will meet at 3:00 pm.

Non-Group on Institutions and Mechanisms: This non-group  will meet at 3:00 pm.