---
title: "IPCC-24 HIGHLIGHTS"
id: enb12275e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12275e
date: 
abstract: "On Saturday, delegates completed line-by-line consideration of the  draft SPM in plenary and closed the eighth session of WGIII after  agreeing to the revised text of the SPM and accepting its  underlying scientific and technical assessment. In the morning,  delegates finished deliberations on a section of the SPM concerned  with the costs of CCS and its economic potential. In the  afternoon, evening and into the night, delegates considered  sections on: risks of CCS; legal issues associated with storage;  implications for emission inventories and accounting; and the  public perception of CCS. Delegates also resolved outstanding  issues after discussions in several informal contact groups and in  informal consultations. Co-Chair Metz closed the meeting at 1:15  am on Sunday morning."
---

# CONSIDERATION OF THE DRAFT SUMMARY FOR POLICY MAKERS

What are the costs of CCS and what is its economic potential?  After the US expressed concern about text being policy  prescriptive, delegates agreed to amend the text to note that  models indicate that the major contribution of CCS to climate  change mitigation would come from deployment in the energy sector.  Delegates then considered text on the minimum carbon prices  necessary for a major CCS contribution to mitigation. CHILE and  NEW ZEALAND expressed concern over the US$ 25 - 30 price quoted,  given the long lifetime of some projects. Delegates agreed to text  noting that most modeling, as assessed in the Special Report,  suggests that CCS systems start to deploy at a significant level  when carbon prices begin to reach approximately US$ 25 - 30.

On text noting that low cost capture possibilities can lead to  storage of up to 360 Mt CO2 'cumulatively' under low or absent  incentives, AUSTRALIA suggested clarifying that 'cumulatively'  refers to the lifetime of the projects observed in the underlying  study. The Lead Authors agreed to reword the 360 Mt CO2 reference  and delegates agreed to the rest of the sentence.

On worldwide storage capacity in geological formations, DENMARK  and GERMANY suggested noting that the quoted amount of 'at least'  2,000 Gt CO2 is an estimate. CHINA expressed concern that the text  did not explain that this number relates to technical, as opposed  to economic, storage potential. Delegates agreed to accept the  text with an explanation of the number in a footnote. In the next  paragraph, the US stressed the need to convey that storage  potential in saline formations could be much larger than 2,000 Gt  CO2. Delegates agreed that the text would refer to uncertainty in  the 'upper limit estimates.' GERMANY highlighted that ocean and  geological storage potential cannot be directly compared given  their different retention times, and JAPAN noted that this  difference is addressed elsewhere in the SPM. Delegates agreed to  text and a footnote explaining the economic potential of CCS under  different stabilization scenarios, and in a least-cost mitigation  portfolio.

On the role of CCS in mitigation portfolios, delegates agreed to  DENMARK's proposal to specify that text noting that 'CCS in a  mitigation portfolio reduces the costs of stabilizing carbon  dioxide concentrations by 30% or more' refers to certain scenario  studies. CHINA proposed deleting a figure that shows the  contribution of CCS as part of a mitigation portfolio, noting that  the figure only refers to two scenario studies for stabilization  at 550 ppmv CO2. GERMANY, AUSTRIA, and KENYA highlighted the  relevance of the figure and supported keeping it. AUSTRALIA  supported retention of the figure, but agreed with CHINA that the  text should state that it refers to illustrative examples of the  range of scenario studies. After informal consultations led by  AUSTRALIA, delegates agreed to add text noting that analyses in  this field are limited and further assessment may be necessary to  improve information. In the figure itself, delegates agreed to  remove all references to the 550 ppmv scenario, and that these  changes will apply to a figure in the Technical Summary of the  Special Report, but the figure would remain unchanged in the  Special Report. In the caption to the figure, delegates agreed to  emphasize that: the figure provides an illustrative example of the  global potential contribution of CCS as part of a mitigation  portfolio; the results vary considerably on regional scales; and  the example is based on a single scenario and does not show the  full range of uncertainties associated with these matters.

###     What are the local health, safety and environmental risks of CCS?

On local risks associated with carbon dioxide pipeline transport,  ZAMBIA sought clarification of a statement that the risks are  possibly lower than comparable hydrocarbon pipelines. Lead Author  Richard Doctor explained that the statement was based on 20 years  of experience in the US. The text was accepted without amendment.  Lead Authors Richard Doctor and Peter Cook answered questions on  the risks to humans of exposure to concentrations of carbon  dioxide. The US proposed, and delegates agreed, to specify that a  sudden, large release of carbon dioxide would pose immediate  dangers to human life and health at exposures to concentrations of  carbon dioxide greater than 7-10% by volume in air. Delegates  agreed to a US proposal to add a sentence from the Technical  Summary noting that no major obstacles to pipeline design for CCS  are foreseen.

On the risks posed by geological storage, Co-Chair Davidson  introduced text that notes that with appropriate site selection, a  regulatory system, and the appropriate use of remediation methods,  the local health, safety and environmental risks of geological  storage would be comparable to risks of current activities such as  natural gas storage, EOR, and deep underground disposal of acid  gas. Delegates agreed to this text after deleting a reference to  less severe impacts of leakage from offshore storage locations  relative to onshore locations.

On the effects of direct ocean injection of carbon dioxide,  delegates considered whether direct injection 'would' or 'could'  cause mortality of ocean organisms. JAPAN sought to include text  specifying that mortality only occurs near injection points, while  CHILE, supported by MALAYSIA and CHINA, said ocean effects could  not be inferred from the results of studies in confined  environments. In the afternoon, delegates returned to this issue,  approving text for the remaining paragraph of the section, which  notes that the environmental impacts of large-scale mineral  carbonation would be a consequence of the required mining and  disposal of resulting products that have no practical use, and  explains that the impacts of mineral carbonation are similar to  those of large-scale surface mines.

Will physical leakage of stored carbon dioxide compromise CCS as a  climate change mitigation option? FRANCE, with support from  others, stressed the need to highlight that leakage from ocean  storage could offset some of the benefits of CCS. The US, with  support from JAPAN, CANADA and others, proposed separating wording  on geological and ocean storage due to differences in retention  times, and to include mineral carbonation as a separate heading.  Delegates agreed to this proposal.

On the policy implications of slow leakage from storage sites,  BELGIUM suggested that a reference to leakage of 'small'  quantities of carbon dioxide offsetting benefits from CCS is  misleading, and proposed, and delegates agreed, to delete 'small.'  Supported by NORWAY and the US, BELGIUM proposed distinguishing  more clearly between leakage from ocean and geological storage.  JAPAN underscored that an 85% retention rate can be achieved when  carbon dioxide is injected to an ocean depth of 3000 meters, and  noted parallels between ocean and geological storage. After  further discussion and informal consultations led by the US,  delegates agreed to note that assessments of the implications of  leakage for climate change mitigation depend on the framework  chosen for decision making, and on the information on the  fractions retained for geological or ocean storage, as presented  elsewhere in the SPM.

What are the legal and regulatory issues for implementing carbon  dioxide storage? Delegates agreed to add 'inter alia' before the  list of existing regulations that could be directly applicable to  geological storage, and to add 'pollution controls' to the list,  as proposed by NORWAY. A reference to US property rights was  removed, as suggested by CANADA and supported by the US and EGYPT,  and replaced with a reference to subsurface property rights.

Delegates agreed to a proposal by the US clarifying that no formal  interpretation exists on whether carbon dioxide injection into the  ocean is compatible with international law. The NETHERLANDS  requested inclusion of reference to cross-border geological  storage. The US proposed, and delegates agreed, to delete  reference to the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea as it was  speculative. After JAPAN noted that the OSPAR Convention is a  regional treaty, a paragraph elaborating on the OSPAR and London  conventions was deleted.

What are the implications of CCS for emission inventories and  accounting? Referring to comments about the organization of this  section, Co-Chair Metz noted the importance of distinguishing  between emission estimation, monitoring, and accounting. On text  noting that current UNFCCC reporting guidelines are not fully  applicable to CCS, discussion centered on whether reference to the  Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines on National Greenhouse Gas  Inventories, or to reporting guidelines under the Kyoto Protocol  should be included. After informal consultation, text was agreed  with reference to the IPCC Guidelines.

###     What are the Gaps in Knowledge?

AUSTRIA, with support from  GERMANY, BELGIUM, and others, proposed the addition of a new  section in the SPM, which notes that there are gaps in knowledge  regarding some aspects of CCS, and that increasing knowledge and  experience would reduce uncertainties and facilitate decision  making. Delegates agreed to the proposal.

What is CCS and how could it contribute to mitigating climate  change? After a report from NORWAY on the work of a contact group  established on Thursday, delegates agreed to text for the opening  section of the SPM. The agreed text states that CCS is an option  in the portfolio of mitigation actions for stabilization of  greenhouse gas concentrations, and that the TAR indicates that  no single technology option will provide all of the reductions.

# CLOSING PLENARY

Delegates reconvened just before 1:00 am on Sunday morning and  approved the revised draft SPM (8th WG III/Doc. 2a, Rev. 1).  Delegates also approved the Adjustments to the Technical Summary  and Chapters for consistency with the approved SPM (8th WG  III/Doc. 2c), and the underlying scientific/technical assessment  in the Special Report (8th WG III/Doc. 2b). WG III agreed to pass  on its best wishes to the family of the late Dr David Pearce.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

The corridors began to fill up as the plenary emptied throughout  the last day of WGIII-8, with more informal contact groups  convening to consider particular sections of the draft SPM. While  the day began with some pessimism as to whether the remaing text  of the draft SPM could be agreed by the scheduled closing time,  steady progress during the afternoon seemed to take many delegates  by surprise. By the 6.00 pm dinner break, some participants were  prepared to lay wagers as to the finishing time, with one  optimistic delegate suggesting 8.00 pm, while more seasoned  observers suggested that 12.00 am was more realistic. In the end,  experience had its way.