---
title: "REPORT OF THE MEETINGS OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES OF THE UN FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE:: 9-18 DECEMBER 1996"
id: 1239000e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/1239000e
date: 1996-12-18
abstract: "The subsidiary bodies of the UN Framework Convention on  Climate Change met in Geneva from 9-18 December 1996. The  fifth session of the Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate  (AGBM-5) met from 9-13 December, the fourth session of the  Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice  (SBSTA-4) and the third session of the Ad Hoc Group on  Article 13 (AG13-3) met from 16-18 December 1996. The fourth  session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI-4)  met from 10-11 December 1996. Informal roundtables were  convened on 9 December, to discuss proposals from Parties,  and on 17 December, to discuss Activities Implemented  Jointly (AIJ)."
---

AGBM-5 considered proposals from 14 Parties or groups of  Parties regarding the strengthening the commitments in  Articles 4.2(a) and (b), advancing the implementation of  Article 4.1 and possible elements of a protocol or other  legal instrument. Delegates expressed a wide range of views  on polices and measures (P&Ms) and quantified emission  limitation and reduction objectives (QELROS) and on the form  and scope of a possible protocol. AGBM-5 adopted conclusions  requesting the Secretariat to produce a 'framework  compilation' of proposals for further consideration.

SBSTA-4 discussed a number of issues including: cooperation  with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC);  the longer-term programme of work; possible revisions to  guidelines for non-Annex I countries' communications;  national communications from Annex I Parties; activities  implemented jointly (AIJ); and technology transfer.  Discussions were complex and often difficult, but SBSTA-4  confirmed future cooperation with the IPCC, agreed to apply  the revised IPCC 1996 guidelines for national greenhouse gas  (GHG) inventories and agreed to further work on revisions to  the Uniform Reporting Format and methodogical issues  pertaining to AIJ.

SBI-4 finalized agreement on the Annex to the Memorandum of  Understanding (MOU) between the Conference of the Parties  (COP) and the Council of the Global Environmental Facility  (GEF). AG13-3 considered responses to a questionnaire  relating to a multilateral consultative process (MCP). While  delegates did not agree to any conclusions, they further  elaborated their positions on a possible MCP and agreed to  continue consideration at their next meeting in February.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FCCC AND ITS SUBSIDIARY BODIES

The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  was adopted on 9 May 1992, and was opened for signature at  the UN Conference on Environment and Development in June  1992 in Rio de Janeiro, where it received 155 signatures.  The Convention entered into force on 21 March 1994, 90 days  after receipt of the 50th ratification. The Convention has  now been ratified by almost 160 countries.

## COP-1

The first meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the UN  Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP-1) took place in  Berlin from 28 March - 7 April 1995. Delegates reached  agreement on what many believed to be the central issue  before COP-1 - adequacy of commitments. The result was a  mandate to launch a process toward appropriate action for  the period beyond the year 2000, including strengthening of  the commitments of developed countries. Delegates also  reached agreement on a number of other important issues,  including the establishment of a pilot phase for  implementation of joint projects, the location of the  Permanent Secretariat in Bonn, Germany, the budget for the  Secretariat, financial procedures and the establishment of  the subsidiary bodies. Delegates, however, did not reach  consensus on the rules of procedure. This critical issue,  including a decision on the voting rules and the composition  of the Bureau, was deferred until COP-2.

## AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE (AGBM)

COP-1 established an open-ended Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin  Mandate (AGBM) to begin a process to enable it to take  appropriate action for the period beyond 2000, including the  strengthening of the commitments of Annex I Parties through  the adoption of a protocol or another legal instrument.

At AGBM-1, held in Geneva from 21-25 August 1995, delegates  considered several issues, including an analysis and  assessment to identify possible policies and measures for  Annex I Parties and requests for inputs to subsequent  sessions. They debated the nature, content and duration of  the analysis and assessment and its relationship to other  aspects of the process. Several developed and developing  countries stressed that analysis and assessment should be  conducted in parallel and not prior to the negotiations, but  a few developing countries insisted that more time was  needed, particularly to evaluate economic costs.

At AGBM-2, held in Geneva from 30 October - 3 November 1995,  debate over the extent of analysis and assessment continued,  but delegates also heard new ideas for the structure and  form of a possible protocol. Delegates considered:  strengthening of commitments in Article 4.2 (a) and (b)  regarding policies and measures, as well as Quantified  Emission Limitation and Reduction Objectives (QELROs) within  specified time-frames; advancing the implementation of  Article 4.1; and possible features of a protocol or another  legal instrument.

At AGBM-3, held in Geneva from 5-8 March 1996, delegates  heard a number of specific proposals on new commitments for  Annex I Parties, including a two-phase CO2 emissions  reduction target proposed by Germany. They also discussed  how Annex I countries might distribute or share new  commitments, and whether those should take the form of an  amendment or protocol. Delegates agreed to compile proposals  for new commitments for consideration at AGBM-4, and to hold  informal roundtable discussions on policies and measures as  well as on QELROs.

AGBM-4, held from 8-19 July 1996 in Geneva, again considered  strengthening the commitments in Article 4.2 (a) and (b);  implementation of Article 4.1; the possible features of a  protocol or other legal instrument; and the Berlin Mandate  process. AGBM-4 completed its in-depth analyses of the  likely elements of a protocol or other legal instrument, and  appeared ready to move forward to the preparation of a  negotiating text at its next session. Most of the  discussions dealt with approaches to policies and measures,  QELROs, and an assessment of the likely impact of new  commitments for Annex I Parties on developing countries.

## SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE  (SBSTA)

The SBSTA was established by COP-1 to link scientific,  technical and technological assessments, information  provided by competent international bodies, and the policy- oriented needs of the COP.

SBSTA-1 was held in Geneva from 28-30 August 1995. Delegates  confronted technically and politically complex issues,  including: scientific assessments, national communications  from Annex I Parties, methodologies, first communications  from non-Annex I Parties, and AIJ under the pilot phase. The  SBSTA was supposed to establish intergovernmental technical  advisory panels on technologies (TAP-T) and methodologies  (TAP-M), however, it did not have time to consider all of  these issues. Among the more contentious issues were  definition of SBSTA's relationship with the IPCC, the terms  of reference and composition of the TAPs and the elaboration  of guidelines for national communications from non-Annex I  Parties. Delegates successfully identified areas for  cooperation with the IPCC, agreed on a division of labor  with the SBI on technology transfer issues, and requested  the Secretariat to organize a workshop on non-governmental  inputs. No progress was made on the formation of the TAPs  and delegates had to resume this discussion at SBSTA-2.

SBSTA-2, held in Geneva from 27 February-4 March 1996,  considered scientific assessment and cooperation, including  the IPCC's Second Assessment Report (SAR), reporting by  Annex I and non-Annex I Parties, AIJ and the Technical  Advisory Panels (TAPs). The main result was that Parties  documented that they could not yet agree on how to absorb or  respond to scientific predictions of climate change.  Although initial discussions gave the impression that SBSTA- 2 would greet the IPCC's predictions with less resistance  than in previous FCCC negotiations, oil producers and other  developing countries ultimately blocked consensus on  specific conclusions about the SAR. Weekend negotiations  resulted in a fragile agreement on language defining the  divergence of opinion. Three paragraphs in the SBSTA's  report list points of contention, alternately highlighting  the urgency and uncertainty in the IPCC report of a  'discernible human influence' on climate change. One line of  the SBSTA's conclusions tells the story of the TAPs: at this  stage the SBSTA could not agree on modalities.

At SBSTA-3, held from 9-16 July 1996, delegates discussed  the SAR and sent an unfinished draft decision with brackets  (FCCC/CP/1996/L.11) to the COP for resolution. The draft  decision provides advice on how the SAR can be used for  implementation. Decisions were adopted in conjunction with  the SBI on Communications from Annex I Parties  (FCCC/CP/1996/L.13 and Add. 1) and on Communications from  non-Annex I Parties (FCCC/CP/1996/L.12). The SBI and the  SBSTA also agreed on a decision on AIJ (FCCC/CP/1996/L.7).  Progress was made on a roster of experts and technical  panels and the SBSTA also agreed to reconsider NGO  consultation mechanisms and cooperation with the IPCC.

## SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION (SBI)

The SBI was established by the COP to assist in the review  and assessment of the implementation of the Convention and  in the preparation and implementation of the COP's  decisions. SBI-1 took place from 31 August - 1 September  1995 in Geneva. The SBI addressed: communications from Annex  I Parties; a progress report on in-depth review;  institutional and budgetary matters; matters relating to the  financial mechanism; and the elaboration and scheduling of  the programme of work for 1996-1997. Delegates recommended  that the COP adopt the draft Memorandum of Understanding  with the GEF as the financial mechanism, and proposed a  draft decision on this item to be adopted by COP-2.

At SBI-2, held in Geneva from 27 February - 4 March 1996,  delegates considered in-depth reviews of national  communications, matters related to the financial mechanism,  financial and technical cooperation, transfer of technology,  arrangements for the relocation of the Secretariat to Bonn,  and COP-2. While delegates welcomed the GEF Council's  adoption of its operational strategy, many noted the need to  expedite the process of providing 'full agreed costs' for  non-Annex I communications or risk serious delays.  Developing countries frequently noted that providing funds  to the GEF and providing funds to countries were not the  same thing. SBI's review of in-depth reports revealed that  many delegations found the national communications in need  of comparability and consistency. The problem of membership  distribution provoked several lengthy debates on the  composition of the Bureau, a question pending since COP-1.  Despite numerous consultations, the issue remained  outstanding.

At SBI-3, held 9-16 July 1996 in Geneva, little discussion  of difficult issues took place during open sessions.  Delegates noted their objections to several draft decisions,  which were referred immediately to contact groups by the  Chair. Differences were resolved in closed sessions by  Parties, and were considered for adoption by the open SBI  session only after consensus had been reached. Contact group  issues included: technology transfer; the operating budget  of the Secretariat; legal issues concerning relocation of  the Secretariat to Bonn and the possibility of setting up a  liaison office with the Secretariat at UN Headquarters in  New York; guidance to the GEF Council; the Annex to the  Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the GEF Council  and the COP; and national communications from non-Annex I  Parties. The contact groups were able to resolve all  outstanding issues with the exception of the Annex to the  MOU. The SBI's decisions, as well as an explanation of the  unresolved MOU issue, are contained in the report of SBI-3  (FCCC/SBI/1996/L.3).

## AD HOC GROUP ON ARTICLE 13 (AG13)

AG13 was set up to consider the establishment of a  multilateral consultative process available to Parties to  resolve questions on implementation. AG13-1, held from 30-31  October 1995 in Geneva, decided to request Parties, non- Parties, and intergovernmental and non-governmental  organizations to make written submissions in response to a  questionnaire on a multilateral consultative process  (FCCC/AG13/1995/2, para. 17). Nineteen Parties, one non- party and ten NGOs submitted responses, which are contained  in FCCC/AG13/1996/MISC.1 and MISC.2. The documents provide a  spectrum of views on the multilateral consultative process  and identify common areas of understanding.

At AG13-2, held 10 July 1996 in Geneva, delegates discussed  a multilateral consultative process (MCP) for the FCCC.  Participants received a synthesis of responses to a  questionnaire on establishing an MCP under Article 13  (FCCC/AG13/1996/1) to be considered at the Group's December  session. The EU recommended a draft decision extending the  AG13 mandate to COP-3 and a role in examining ways to apply  an MCP to a protocol in cooperation with the AGBM. Delegates  later adopted this draft decision. The meeting then adopted  the Chair's draft text on linkages between AG-13 and AGBM,  asking the COP to decide that the AGBM may seek such advice  as may be deemed necessary from AG-13.

## COP-2

The Second Conference of the Parties (COP-2) met in Geneva  from 8-19 July 1996. More than 1500 participants from  governments, intergovernmental organizations and NGOs  participated. While many of the more contentious issues,  such as treatment of the IPCC Second Assessment Report  (SAR), were left unresolved, COP-2 did produce some  important political statements. The COP concluded by noting  the 'Geneva Declaration,' which endorses the IPCC  conclusions and calls for legally-binding objectives and  significant reductions in greenhouse gas emissions.

The Conference also saw a significant shift in position by  the US, which for the first time supported a legally-binding  agreement to fulfill the Berlin Mandate. However, even as  Parties prepared to strengthen commitments, COP-2  highlighted the sharpest differences yet between  delegations. The strong declarations of support for the SAR  were far from unanimous, suggesting the need for substantial  work in future sessions of the COP's subsidiary bodies  before December 1997 when COP-3 meets in Kyoto, Japan.

# AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE

The fifth session of the Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate  (AGBM) opened on Monday, 9 December 1996. Delegates had the  following documents before them: the provisional agenda and  annotations (FCCC/AGBM/1996/9); a synthesis of proposals by  Parties on the strengthening of the commitments in Articles  4.2(a) and (b), advancing the implementation of Article 4.1  and possible elements of a protocol or another legal  instrument (FCCC/AGBM/ 1996/10); proposals from Parties  (FCCC/AGBM/1996/Misc.2); and four addenda containing  additional proposals (FCCC/AGBM/ 1996/Misc.2/Add. 1, 2, 3  and 4). Fourteen Parties or groups of Parties submitted  proposals.

AGBM Chair Raúl Estrada-Oyuela (Argentina) recalled that  delegates have called for a reduction in the number of  options available for policies and measures since AGBM-2 and  said this session must focus on that goal as well as on  reducing the number of options for QELROS. He said that  maintaining a 'patchwork of possibilities' will hinder the  adoption of definitive positions and make implementation  more difficult. He expressed hope that the synthesis  document would guide delegates' work.

FCCC Executive Secretary Michael Zammit-Cutayar noted that  Parties are giving careful thought to the proposals'  content. He said the synthesis document shows how much is on  the table and indicates the direction of future work.  Delegates will have to decide which options to set aside,  which ones are mutually exclusive and which ones should be  considered for further work. The result will send a strong  signal to markets, investors and consumers as to the  direction of governmental policy over the next decades.

Bert Bolin, Chair of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate  Change (IPCC), presented the IPCC Technical Paper on  Technologies, Policies and Measures for Mitigating Climate  Change. He said that different pathways can be chosen to  reach stable emission concentrations and presented a  comparison of the possible stabilization levels, cumulative  emissions and conventional and potential reserves of fossil  fuels. He stated that an agreement on further limitations of  greenhouse gas emissions requires decisions on: which level  of equivalent CO2 stabilization might be appropriate; the  implications of such a level for permissible cumulative  global CO2 emissions; and how to apportion the permissible  cumulative CO2 emissions between countries.

The agenda and organization of the work of the session were  then adopted. Mr. Suphavit Piamphongsant (Thailand) was  appointed Rapporteur of AGBM-5.

STRENGTHENING COMMITMENTS IN ARTICLE 4.2(a) AND (b) On Tuesday, 10 December, the AGBM considered Agenda Item 3,  Strengthening commitments in Article 4.2(a) and (b):  policies and measures (P&Ms) and quantified emission  limitation and reduction objectives within specified time  frames (QELROs).

### POLICIES AND MEASURES

Regarding P&Ms, the synthesis  document (FCCC/AGBM/1996/10) notes that two general  approaches have been discussed within the AGBM: a menu  approach, wherein Annex I Parties could choose from a list  according to national circumstances; and a mandatory  approach, under which a new legal instrument would require  certain common and/or coordinated P&Ms. The document also  states that proposals on P&Ms address three areas:  mechanisms for implementation, policy objectives to be  pursued by P&Ms and specific P&Ms for inclusion in a  protocol or another legal instrument.

Delegates expressed differing opinions regarding the  approach to P&Ms. The EU, supported by SWITZERLAND, favored  adopting a mandatory approach, under which the new legal  instrument would require certain common and coordinated  P&Ms. The EU proposed three separate annexes to the  protocol, drawing distinctions between mandatory,  coordinated and optional P&Ms. He also proposed an 'Annex X'  for those Parties that adopt and implement these P&Ms.  Responding to numerous questions, the EU clarified that  Annex X could include all Annex I countries and new OECD  members. Non-Annex I countries could also be included on a  voluntary basis. Supported by BRAZIL, AUSTRALIA, VENEZUELA,  SAUDI ARABIA and CANADA, the US opposed harmonized measures  and advocated flexibility through national programmes geared  to national circumstances.

The G-77/CHINA, supported by CHINA, INDIA, the REPUBLIC OF  KOREA, BRAZIL, MALAYSIA, SAUDI ARABIA, GHANA, SAMOA, the  MARSHALL ISLANDS, VENEZUELA, MEXICO, ZIMBABWE, SENEGAL,  IRAN, NIGERIA, THAILAND, MAURITIUS, the PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF  KOREA, ALGERIA, CHILE and KUWAIT, stressed that the AGBM's  work must remain within the Berlin Mandate. He expressed  concern that P&M proposals did not focus solely on Annex I  Parties' commitments and stressed that developing countries'  implementation depended on developed countries fulfilling  their commitments. He referred to the concept of 'Annex X  Parties', the separation of P&Ms and QELROS and concepts  such as emission banking, emission permits and AIJ as  attempts to stray from commitments.

Both developed and developing countries highlighted the need  for flexible approaches and the importance of economic  considerations. The REPUBLIC OF KOREA, CANADA, JAPAN, NEW  ZEALAND and MAURITIUS supported a menu approach to provide  flexibility for countries with differing economic positions  and national contexts. MEXICO and CHILE supported a flexible  approach with some binding commitments. NEW ZEALAND  highlighted the need for least-cost solutions and advocated  market-based instruments. SWITZERLAND noted that some common  measures, such as taxation of aviation fuel, are necessary  and important for small countries with limited home markets.  CANADA and AUSTRALIA also suggested that activities to  combat climate change need to be beneficial for the economy  and that action should not impinge on competitiveness.  THAILAND questioned the concept of 'cost effectiveness' in  mitigating climate change.

BRAZIL supported common policies in sectors of an  international nature and, supported by MEXICO and IRAN,  cautioned against policies that would impose barriers to  international trade and negatively affect non-Annex I  countries. SAUDI ARABIA, supported by KUWAIT and ALGERIA,  suggested that proposals of P&Ms should be accompanied by an  analysis of their impacts on developing countries, in  particular with regard to economic growth and international  trade. MAURITIUS supported voluntary agreements for the  elaboration of mechanisms of P&Ms and asked whether taxes  and emissions permits would apply to Annex I countries only.

Delegates also noted other considerations. NEW ZEALAND noted  the need for refinement of policy objectives. CANADA  supported 'less intrusive' mechanisms for implementing P&Ms,  including education and information sharing. CANADA, SAMOA,  the MARSHALL ISLANDS and MAURITIUS favored a combined  approach for negotiating P&Ms and QELROS. SAMOA, on behalf  of Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS), called for a  coordination mechanism for discussing and implementing P&Ms.  IRAN argued that P&Ms should include information and  technology exchange. VENEZUELA highlighted the advantages  offered by utilizing fossil fuels while developing  technology to minimize their impacts on climate.

### QELROS

The synthesis document (FCCC/AGBM/1996/10) addresses  several issues regarding QELROs, including: legal character;  coverage; level and timing; distribution of commitments; and  flexibility.

On the legal character of QELROs, NORWAY, ICELAND, the  MARSHALL ISLANDS, the EU, CHILE, EGYPT, MOROCCO, MAURITIUS  and SAMOA, on behalf of AOSIS, called for legally-binding  commitments for Annex I countries, but MOROCCO cautioned  against negative impacts on developing countries. ARGENTINA  and NEW ZEALAND called for mechanisms for compliance and  dispute settlement. A number of countries, including NORWAY,  urged a degree of flexibility for Annex I countries. The US  suggested 'hard commitments to soft targets,' wherein  commitments would focus on the development of a programme,  implementation of P&Ms, reporting and review. VENEZUELA  recommended defining the legal nature once objectives were  quantified.

On the coverage for greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, the EU,  the US, EGYPT, IRAN and MAURITIUS favored covering all GHGs.  The MARSHALL ISLANDS preferred to cover only CO2 gases.  NORWAY, supported by CANADA and NEW ZEALAND, called for a  single objective relating to all greenhouse gases through  the use of a 'basket' approach containing as many greenhouse  gases as possible. ARGENTINA, supported by VENEZUELA and  CHILE, preferred a 'gas-by-gas approach'.

On the level and timing of QELROs, SAMOA, on behalf of  AOSIS, the MARSHALL ISLANDS, the MALDIVES and MAURITIUS  referred to the AOSIS draft protocol, which requires Annex I  Parties to reduce 1990 CO2 emission levels by at least 20  percent by the year 2005. SAMOA, on behalf of AOSIS, the  MARSHALL ISLANDS and the EU promoted early action while the  US supported a longer time-horizon. FRANCE suggested an  ultimate per capita reduction in CO2 compatible with  convergence at a global reduction of 7 percent by 2010.  EGYPT preferred a uniform level of emissions. ICELAND and  JAPAN proposed multi-year targets and VENEZUELA opposed the  introduction of targets and timetables. ARGENTINA suggested  not only focusing on percentages and time frames but also on  standards for economic efficiency.

On the distribution of commitments, the US proposed flat  rate reductions that would bind all Annex I Parties to the  same QELROs. A number of Parties, including NORWAY, RUSSIA,  ICELAND, AUSTRALIA, CANADA, JAPAN, CHILE, FRANCE, the  REPUBLIC OF KOREA, IRAN and EGYPT, called for  differentiation among Annex I countries in order to take  account of differences in national circumstances and  economic burdens. Several delegations highlighted the  importance of equity and flexible distribution. The RUSSIAN  FEDERATION highlighted Article 4.6, which calls for  flexibility for countries with economies in transition.  ARGENTINA proposed setting objectives for regional groups  and further study of differentiation. SAMOA, on behalf of  AOSIS, said there was insufficient time to negotiate  differentiation.

NORWAY, ICELAND and AUSTRALIA suggested establishing  indicators as a basis for differentiation. NORWAY proposed  common levels of greenhouse gas emissions per unit of GDP,  greenhouse gas emissions per capita and GDP per capita.  AUSTRALIA suggested considering GDP growth of the economy,  population growth, fossil fuel trade and emission intensity  of exports. VENEZUELA and IRAN suggested including historic  responsibility for concentration of greenhouse gases. BRAZIL  favored calculating the burden starting from a baseline  year. AUSTRALIA suggested that indicators could be  negotiated through a bottom-up approach.

Regarding flexibility, FRANCE reminded Parties of the  importance of minimizing costs in achieving objectives and  proposed flexibility in meeting their QELROs. With the  REPUBLIC OF KOREA, he noted the need for joint or  coordinated P&Ms at the international level. NORWAY, CANADA,  the US, the EU and FRANCE supported the idea of allowing  Annex I countries to meet their commitments through joint  implementation (JI). VENEZUELA cautioned that AIJ and JI  were distinct concepts and that JI should only be considered  with respect to other Annex I countries. BRAZIL urged that  JI credit should apply only if both countries had emissions  targets. ARGENTINA stated that flexibility should not be a  'blank cheque'.

The idea of emissions trading to achieve flexibility was  supported by delegations such as NORWAY, CANADA, NEW ZEALAND  and FRANCE. The EU said that emissions permits could not  replace P&Ms. AUSTRALIA said that trading regimes would need  to address equity concerns. CANADA and NEW ZEALAND supported  cumulative or aggregate targets. The US proposed emissions  banking or borrowing. EGYPT warned that borrowing could  constitute an excuse to delay action. MALAYSIA suggested  that borrowers should pay interest, which could be used to  set up a fund to safeguard countries against the effects of  climate change.

The CLIMATE ACTION NETWORK, representing environmental NGOs,  called on COP-3 to adopt a protocol imposing legally-binding  commitments by industrialized countries to cut CO2 by 20  percent by 2005 and adopt aggressive targets thereafter. The  INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL FOR LOCAL ENVIRONMENTAL INITIATIVES,  representing local authorities, noted that local governments  began setting emissions targets five years ago and called  for international targets as an initial step towards  strategy.

## CONTINUING TO ADVANCE IMPLEMENTATION OF EXISTING COMMITMENTS  IN ARTICLE 4.1

On Wednesday, 11 December, delegates considered Agenda Item  4 on continuing to advance the implementation of existing  commitments in Article 4.1. The Chair described the issue of  'Annex X' as an internal discussion among the OECD countries  that should not require further discussion in this session.

The synthesis document (FCCC/AGBM/1996/10) notes, inter  alia, that the AGBM may wish to note work already done to  advance implementation through the preparation of national  guidelines. The document states that Parties have made  proposals for additional action on: national inventories;  climate change response strategies; technology development  and transfer; adaptation; inclusion of climate change  considerations in policy initiatives; research and  development; education and training; communication of  information; and financial assistance.

A number of developing countries focused on the fulfillment  of commitments by developed countries. The G-77/CHINA,  supported by MALAYSIA, the MARSHALL ISLANDS, MICRONESIA,  IRAN, INDIA, the PHILIPPINES, VENEZUELA, NIGERIA, BRAZIL,  INDONESIA and THAILAND, emphasized that all sections of  Article 4.1 must be considered equally and in an integrated  manner. She expressed concern that developed countries might  not pursue their full commitments, as outlined in Article  4.2, and referred to the IPCC's Second Assessment Report  (SAR), which shows that most emissions have originated from  developed countries while per capita emissions in developing  countries are relatively small. She emphasized Articles 4.3  and 4.7, which state that developed countries shall provide  new and additional financial resources and shall transfer  technology to developing countries. She also stressed that  AIJ should not be seen as a solution to Article 4.1.  THAILAND opposed the imposition of new commitments on non- Annex I countries by Annex I countries, which have not  fulfilled their own commitments. VENEZUELA called for a  regular review on the adequacy of commitments.

Many developing countries also highlighted national efforts  and specified areas for stronger developed country  assistance. MEXICO is currently developing a national action  plan and stressed timely access to technologies and  financial support. INDIA said developing countries are  already engaging in sustainable social and economic  development. IRAN said, on national inventories, that  developing countries have done more than required and  developed countries have not done enough. MICRONESIA called  for support in capacity building, particularly in the area  of monitoring sea level rise. The MARSHALL ISLANDS and  NIGERIA stressed that technology transfer is pivotal to the  Convention. MALAYSIA expressed disappointment with some  Parties' focus on national communications and inventories  and stressed the need for research and systematic  observation.

Developed countries expressed a range of views on further  commitments. NORWAY opposed further commitments for  developing countries, calling on Annex I countries to  advance the implementation of existing commitments on  technology transfer and financial assistance. These  requirements and a further investigation into incentive  measures and cooperative structures would be crucial to the  success of policies such as AIJ. The EU stressed the need  for cooperative efforts between all Parties in the areas of  development, application and diffusion of technologies,  practices and process; AIJ; and consistency between  programmes of multilateral development banks and the private  sector and the objectives of the FCCC. He requested the  Chair to include these elements, as contained in the EU's  draft protocol, in the document to be prepared for AGBM-6.

The US agreed that the focus would remain on developed  country commitments, but noted the increase of greenhouse  gas emissions by developing countries and emphasized that  future steps under the Convention must include all Parties.  He suggested specifying dates by which all Parties should  meet their QELROS, which could vary with factors such as the  level of development. He proposed developing guidelines for  revising annexes to better select common but differentiated  responsibilities and establishing a graduation mechanism for  movement between Annex I and II, as per Article 4.2(f), as  part of the new instrument. AUSTRALIA stated that non-Annex  I Parties' national guidelines are eagerly awaited as per  the Berlin Mandate's call for all Parties to continue their  commitments under Article 4.1 and requested COP-3 to  consider longer term commitments.

On AIJ and JI, the PHILIPPINES noted that JI should be  applicable to Annex I countries only and called for a  reporting framework for JI to evaluate the benefits derived.  ZIMBABWE urged Annex I countries to avoid allowing AIJ or JI  projects to become 'business as usual' and to take account  of developing countries' own development strategies.  VENEZUELA and THAILAND said that technology transfer cannot  depend on AIJ activities because these are still in a pilot  stage. CANADA characterized JI as a 'win-win' method for  both developed and developing countries that can supply  state of the art technologies. MALAYSIA expressed concern  regarding AIJ as a means to advance Article 4.1.

Delegations also raised other points regarding commitments.  The RUSSIAN FEDERATION called for flexibility in  implementation for countries with economies in transition,  which need to stabilize sustainable economic development. He  supported calculating annual emissions on a percentage basis  from the baseline year of 1990, but proposed 2010 as the  target year to allow for a long-term approach on investment.  TURKEY noted its status as a non-signatory because it is  listed in both Annex I and II, although UNDP considers it a  developing country

## POSSIBLE FEATURES OF A PROTOCOL OR ANOTHER LEGAL INSTRUMENT

On 11-12 December, the AGBM discussed Agenda Item 5,  possible features of a protocol or another legal instrument.  The synthesis document (FCCC/AGBM/1996/10) highlights  several issues, including: the form and scope of the  instrument; communication and review of information and  commitments; annexes; voluntary application of commitments  by non-Annex I Parties; institutions and institutional  support; dispute settlement and compliance; and action after  COP-3.

### FORM AND SCOPE OF THE INSTRUMENT

The EU supported a  protocol to build on FCCC commitments and objectives and  give the Berlin Mandate quantified targets and timetables.  He said the EU's proposed protocol meets these requirements  and can evolve over time. SWITZERLAND and CHILE also favored  a protocol. The G-77/CHINA, supported by VENEZUELA, NIGERIA,  INDIA, SAUDI ARABIA, MEXICO, GAMBIA, MALAYSIA and MOROCCO,  stressed that the instrument should not deviate from the  Berlin Mandate. SAMOA, on behalf of AOSIS, noted that the  structure and language of the AOSIS draft protocol accords  with the Convention. SENEGAL, the MARSHALL ISLANDS, the  DOMINICAN REPUBLIC, the PHILIPPINES and HONDURAS  specifically supported the AOSIS draft protocol. A number of  countries, such as the US, NEW ZEALAND and SAUDI ARABIA said  that the substance of the instrument should determine its  form and possible features.

### COMMUNICATION AND REVIEW OF INFORMATION

The EU stated that  its protocol proposal includes differing timetables for  national communications by Annex I and non-Annex I Parties  and progressive enhancement of commitments. The US urged a  strengthening of national and international mechanisms for  the review of information on implementation. The G-77/CHINA  noted that the preamble of the Berlin Mandate focuses on  review of commitments under Articles 4.2(a) and (b), stating  that the scope of the new instrument should include P&Ms,  QELROs and continuing commitments under Article 4.1. CANADA  said that reporting should take place within specified time  frames and be addressed by the SBI. The US also supported a  time frame for reviewing and updating commitments.

### ANNEXES

A number of views were expressed on possible  annexes to the instrument. The US did not see a need for  annexes on P&Ms. CANADA favored an annex describing  commitments clearly in order to facilitate their rapid  adjustment. CHILE stated that a differentiation of  commitments should be made clear in the body of the protocol  rather than in an annex, and said an annex could cover  quantification. MALAYSIA called for annexes with provisions  to ensure the commitments of Article 4.1 and regular review  of these provisions. NIGERIA opposed the establishment of  any new annexes that create a new category of Parties.

### VOLUNTARY APPLICATION OF COMMITMENTS FOR NON-ANNEX I  PARTIES

NIGERIA, IRAN, SENEGAL and MOROCCO opposed new  commitments for non-Annex I Parties. The US and NEW ZEALAND  stated that they would not object to voluntary commitments  from non-Annex I Parties. The US also suggested providing  non-Parties with positive incentives to join the regime.  AUSTRALIA called for the review process to account for  factors such as those considered in setting commitments, new  scientific information and changes in circumstances. IRAN  called for an analysis of socio-economic impacts on  developing countries before judging the adequacy of  commitments. CHILE emphasized that the fulfillment of any  additional commitments by the developing world depends on  Annex I countries abiding by their commitments. SENEGAL  noted that African countries have already made serious  sacrifices to apply the FCCC but lack sufficient resources.  HONDURAS stressed that the efforts made by developing  countries are as important as those of Annex I countries.

### INSTITUTIONS

The EU, the G-77/CHINA, VENEZUELA,  SWITZERLAND, the US, AUSTRALIA, NEW ZEALAND, SAUDI ARABIA  and MALAYSIA stated a preference for economy of institutions  such as use of the same COP, SBSTA and Secretariat. INDIA  and CANADA also favored drawing heavily from existing  institutions. SWITZERLAND suggested that Parties to the  Convention and Parties to the protocol should hold meetings  in conjunction, but the US and NEW ZEALAND specified that  only Parties to the protocol should take decisions on it.  MOROCCO noted that financial resources should be provided  for any institutions that will service the instrument.

### DISPUTE SETTLEMENT AND COMPLIANCE

The EU noted that its  protocol proposal includes establishment of a multilateral  consultative process (MCP) for both review of compliance and  dispute settlement under the FCCC. INDIA noted that when a  non-Annex I Party or its policies are affected by Annex I  country actions, such as when intellectual property rights  affect terms of trade, those actions should be considered  under Article 13 (MCP) rather than Article 14 (dispute  resolution). SWITZERLAND favored the establishment of a  process to assess compliance with the protocol. KUWAIT  called for an examination of the connection between the  proposed protocol and the work of AG13. CANADA said that the  linkage to Article 13 must be reviewed. The US advocated a  clear structure for commitments and for objectively  measurable targets.

### PREPARATION OF A SYNTHESIS DOCUMENT

CHINA, supported by  INDIA, SRI LANKA, VENEZUELA, MOROCCO, CHILE, SAMOA, GAMBIA,  GHANA and JAPAN, requested a compilation synthesis of all  proposals to be distributed in January. CHINA and INDIA  requested that the sources of the proposals be noted in the  compilation. SIERRA LEONE said a draft text for a protocol  should be available in time for AGBM-6. GHANA, SENEGAL and  VENEZUELA noted that time is needed for additional  suggestions for the compilation and, with SRI LANKA and the  DOMINICAN REPUBLIC, called for a framework compilation to  circulate to capitals before AGBM-6. SAUDI ARABIA cautioned  that this process should not preclude submissions at a later  stage. CHILE noted that a text would encourage signs of  political will to compromise in a new negotiation phase. The  EU reiterated its request to include elements from its  proposal in the synthesis.

Delegations also commented on a number of other points.  NIGERIA noted the needs of African countries and called for  the inclusion of paragraphs on economic damage to non-Annex  I countries from actions by Annex I Parties. IRAN and  BURKINA FASO called for language on technology transfer and  provision of financial resources in the new legal  instrument. NEW ZEALAND commented that the new instrument  should pave the way for future global action, but MOROCCO  and SAUDI ARABIA stated that action after COP-3 exceeds the  Berlin Mandate. KUWAIT also noted that the rules of  procedure for the FCCC are still not adopted, which may  affect the outcome of the AGBM process.

## CHAIR'S DRAFT CONCLUSIONS

On Thursday afternoon, 12 December, AGBM-5 met informally to  consider the Chair's draft conclusions, which contain four  sections.

Sub-item (a) notes that the AGBM reiterated that the  protocol or another legal instrument to be adopted at COP-3  should implement fully the terms of the Berlin Mandate, and  underlined that the Berlin Mandate process will not  introduce any new commitments for Parties not included in  Annex I.

CHINA and the PHILIPPINES proposed retaining sub-item (a) as  is. NIGERIA said the paragraph should remain as is because  numerous delegations had specifically emphasized no new  commitments for developing countries and CHINA said that  some proposals had attempted to introduce commitments for  developing countries. CHINA, INDIA and KUWAIT also supported  noting the sources of proposals as a means to trace the  history of the proposals. The US, supported by the EU,  opposed singling out the phrase from the Berlin Mandate that  specifies no new commitments for developing countries, in  the conclusions.

The Chair proposed noting the reservation of the US. The US  clarified that it had an objection, not a reservation, and  the EU reiterated its concern. CANADA proposed deleting the  reference or including all of paragraph 2(b) of the Berlin  Mandate. The UK proposed including a reference from the  Geneva Declaration, but the Chair noted that not all Parties  had supported the Declaration. Delegates included the  complete text of paragraph 2(b) of the Berlin Mandate, which  states that the process will not introduce new commitments  for non-Annex I Parties but will reaffirm existing  commitments in Article 4.1 and continue to advance the  implementation of these commitments in order to achieve  sustainable development, taking into account Articles 4.3,  4.5 and 4.7.

Sub-item (b) requests the Chair and the Secretariat to  prepare a framework compilation, incorporating textual  proposals from Parties as well as other proposals from  Parties for the elements of a protocol or another legal  instrument, and identifying the sources. The paper will  receive in-depth consideration and serve as a basis for  further proposals from Parties at AGBM-6.

MALAYSIA, supported by CHINA and the PHILIPPINES, said that  including elements outside the Berlin Mandate in the  framework compilation will sidetrack negotiations and  suggested specifying that the compilation should be based on  the Berlin Mandate. The US said that the Convention was  developed on the basis of proposals that did not identify  the sources, and, supported by NORWAY, cautioned against  establishing a new practice.

Sub-item (b) was amended to state that the framework  compilation will receive in-depth consideration and serve as  the basis for further proposals at and following AGBM-6,  bearing in mind the need to circulate text in all UN  languages by 1 June 1997.

Sub-item (c) invites Parties to submit further proposals,  especially proposals incorporating draft text for the  instrument, and requests the Secretariat to issue such  proposals in a miscellaneous document. Proposals received by  15 January 1997 will be taken into account in the  preparation of the framework compilation.

The US noted that other proposals will receive consideration  beyond AGBM-6. Sub-item (c) was accepted without amendment.

Sub-item (d) requests the Chair to explore with interested  delegations the concept of differentiation and criteria for  differentiation with a view to applying a number of  parameters and bringing the results to an informal round  table to be convened at AGBM-6.

INDIA and KUWAIT supported specifying that differentiation,  as mentioned in sub-item (d), applies to Annex I countries.

The US and CANADA noted that while differentiation is  important, other concepts are as well. Sub-item (d) was  amended to note that differentation 'as applicable to Annex  I countries' will be explored.

## FINAL SESSION

The Chair then convened a formal meeting on Thursday, 12  December to adopt the conclusions and the report of the  meeting. No formal report was prepared. Delegates agreed to  adopt an outline of the report and empowered the rapporteur  to complete the report, subject to review at AGBM-6. The  Chair noted that, according to his informal consultations,  AGBM-5 achieved more progress than is immediately apparent  and there is much common ground to be developed. He noted  that statements until this meeting were in general terms and  that the next document will bring AGBM to more concrete  discussions.

# SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE

Chair Tibor Farago (Hungary) opened the fourth session of  the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice  (SBSTA-4) on Monday, 16 December. He noted SBSTA's previous  success on issues such as national communications,  methodological issues, guidelines for communications from  Annex I Parties, technology assessment and transfer and  cooperation with other bodies. He also noted that there has  been less success on scientific issues, election of  officers, a roster of experts and adoption of the rules of  procedure.

## COOPERATION WITH THE IPCC

On Agenda Item 3, Cooperation with the Intergovernmental  Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the Secretariat introduced  document FCCC/SBSTA/1996/18, which identifies the following  issues for SBSTA's consideration: the need for consultation  on the IPCC work programme, long-term emission profiles and  harvested wood products. IPCC Chair Bert Bolin reported on  the status of the six technical papers that the IPCC had  agreed to produce and listed other areas of current IPCC  work. He noted that the IPCC has deferred work on harvested  wood products to SBSTA because it concerns international  trade, which is related to allocation issues.

### GUIDELINES FOR NATIONAL GHG INVENTORIES

The Revised 1996  IPCC Guidelines for National GHG Inventories were introduced  (FCCC/SBSTA/1996/18/Add. 1) for consideration and possible  adoption. Revised guidelines have been established for the  following sectors: fuel combustion, industrial processes,  land-use change and forestry, agricultural soils and waste.

A number of countries expressed their appreciation for the  cooperation between the SBSTA and the IPCC. Many countries,  including INDIA, JAPAN, the RUSSIAN FEDERATION, ZIMBABWE,  CANADA, NORWAY, the EU and MALAYSIA, supported the adoption  of the Revised 1996 Guidelines for emission inventories. The  RUSSIAN FEDERATION called for closer scrutiny of the global  warming potential (GWP) of CFC substitutes. A number of  Parties made statements on the approach by which emissions  related to the consumption of HFCs, PFCs and SF6 are to be  reported. The 'potential approach,' as favored by the US and  TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO, would use annual data on production,  exports, imports and destruction. The emission estimates so  derived do not take into consideration storage and release  of chemicals over time.

The 'actual approach,' in contrast, attempts to account for  the time lag between consumption and emissions. JAPAN,  NORWAY and the EU favored the 'actual emission approach,'  but also encouraged the submission of data using the  'potential approach.' The EU stated that Parties should  report the best available estimate of actual emissions, to  the extent that national circumstances permit. LATVIA  supported ROMANIA and POLAND in stressing the need for  comparability of methodologies.

Parties then discussed when they should begin using the  Revised Guidelines for reporting. JAPAN, INDIA, the EU, NEW  ZEALAND and JAPAN stated that the Revised Guidelines should  be applied to recalculate 1990 base year GHG inventories and  all subsequent years. A number of countries, including  LATVIA, stated that their second inventories are being  prepared and that it would be too complicated to recalculate  them. AOSIS, ROMANIA, HUNGARY, the RUSSIAN FEDERATION,  NORWAY, CANADA, AUSTRALIA, GAMBIA and IRAN supported a more  flexible approach, by which the revised methods would be  applied as a supplement to the 1995 IPCC Guidelines on a  voluntary basis for inventories due in April 1997 and on a  mandatory basis for 1998 and 1999. Inventories due after  1999 would use only the Revised Guidelines. The US urged to  test the revised methods for validity and workability and  apply them, where possible, by 1997.

AUSTRALIA, INDIA, the EU, CANADA and NEW ZEALAND supported  the use of the Revised Guidelines by both Annex I and non- Annex I countries. Some countries, including CHINA, IRAN and  POLAND, did not support this position. MICRONESIA, ROMANIA  and the MARSHALL ISLANDS urged flexibility for developing  countries to apply the revised guidelines. MAURITIUS  suggested a simplified inventory methodology, given the  limited expertise of African countries. CANADA agreed with  JAPAN and HUNGARY that further distribution of the  guidelines and methodology was necessary.

### IPCC WORK PROGRAMME

An initial list of items on which the  IPCC could provide input to the SBSTA was presented in the  annex to document FCCC/SBSTA/1996/18.

Numerous countries, including AUSTRALIA and the US,  supported the work programme. ZIMBABWE urged SBSTA to  request the IPCC to conduct awareness programmes through  workshops at regional levels. CHINA noted the importance of  Article 4.8, on the special needs of vulnerable countries  for study of regional sectoral impacts of climate change.  MAURITIUS, on behalf of the African Group, called for long- term sustained monitoring and projects leading to  vulnerability assessment and adaptation methods and for more  developing country scientists' involvement in the IPCC.  MALAYSIA, CHINA, the PHILIPPINES and INDIA favored  prioritizing regional scenarios on climate change to  facilitate developing countries' work on national  communications. The US, supported by CANADA, pointed to the  need to consider FCCC resources for the work of the IPCC.

The EU asked that the full range of issues covered in the  SAR be considered in the Third Assessment Report (TAR). The  US urged the IPCC to remain flexible and responsive to  SBSTA. CHINA and IRAN proposed that the TAR contain a  section on the impact of activities by Annex I on non-Annex  I countries. KUWAIT urged that IPCC studies be based on  proposals by Parties, adhere to the Berlin Mandate and not  refer to commitments of non-Annex I Parties. MAURITIUS asked  for computer technology to enhance developing country  participation in the IPCC and increase public awareness of  the results of the SAR. MICRONESIA requested representation  of small island developing States (SIDS) in the IPCC and  expert groups.

### LONG-TERM EMISSIONS PROFILES

The IPCC sought the SBSTA's  views on assumptions concerning economic, social and other  goals of Parties between 2000 and 2010 and beyond that were  likely to affect GHG emissions from energy and other  sectors.

CANADA and the US called for realistic scenarios. The EU  suggested using extended and illustrative profiles to  represent the proposals, which range from a 0.5 percent  reduction per annum after 2000 to a 20 percent reduction by  2005 followed by a two percent reduction per annum  thereafter. CHINA called for a focus on the cumulative  concentration of GHG emissions. The US proposed a clear  distinction between 'protocol' proposals and sensitivity  studies, and called for the latter using all combinations of  country participation.

### HARVESTED WOOD PRODUCTS

The IPCC consulted the SBSTA on the  direction of its work on emissions associated with harvested  wood products. JAPAN, the EU and the MARSHALL ISLANDS  supported the idea of an IPCC expert meeting on harvested  products. A number of other countries, including CANADA and  the RUSSIAN FEDERATION, also urged further work on this  issue. MALAYSIA requested the SBSTA to work with the Food  and Agriculture Organization (FAO) or the International  Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO) on wood products and  queried how to take anthropogenic forest fires into account  in national reporting. AUSTRALIA asked for work on  anthropogenic emissions in the context of land use change  and the forestry sector and noted similarities between  harvested wood products, traded emissions and bunker fuels.

### CONCLUSIONS

During its final session, the SBSTA considered  the Chair's draft conclusions on cooperation with the IPCC,  based on the results of informal consultations. The draft  conclusions took note of the revised schedule of work and  urged the IPCC to give high priority to the development of  regional scenarios and regional impacts of climate change  and, as added by KUWAIT, to economic impact assessments of  new commitments by Annex I countries. The conclusions urged  the IPCC to develop a flexible work programmme and requested  Parties to submit comments on the TAR by 30 May 1997.  GERMANY added a reference to the early 1997 IPCC discussion  paper on the preparation of the TAR. The SBSTA also  requested the Secretariat, with the IPCC and other  organizations, to ensure wide dissemination of the Revised  Guidelines for National GHG Inventories to all Parties.

The Chair's draft conclusions on emission profiles note  divergent views regarding format, timing, content and  sensitivity studies to be used in developing profiles, and  request Parties to make their submissions on this item by 15  January 1997. The SBSTA also requests the IPCC to make a  presentation on the development of emission profiles and  possible implications to the climate system at SBSTA-5.  Extensive discussion took place on future SBSTA and IPCC  work on emission profiles.

The conclusions state that SBSTA-5 would continue to  elaborate on profiles, based on proposals submitted by  Parties, with a view to giving clear guidance to the IPCC on  the development of long-term emission profiles. The EU,  supported by TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO, ARGENTINA, CANADA,  SWITZERLAND, GERMANY and the US, proposed requesting the  IPCC to complete this work on the basis of these submissions  in consultation with the Joint Working Group of officers of  the FCCC and the IPCC. The Chair moved to adopt the  conclusions as amended, but SAUDI ARABIA, KUWAIT and NIGERIA  strongly opposed this proposal and called its adoption  'illegal.' BRAZIL's suggested text that maintained the EU  proposal and added that the SBSTA would continue to work on  this issue during its fifth session, which was adopted.

The Chair's draft conclusions on the application of the 1996  Revised IPCC Guidelines for National GHG Inventories note  the additional data, information and simplified  methodologies they contained. CHINA, the PHILIPPINES and  KUWAIT opposed the EU's preference to 'approve and adopt'  the Revised Guidelines. The US suggested that the SBSTA  'take note' of the Revised Guidelines adopted by the IPCC  and 'decides that they should be used as follows': Annex I  countries should apply them for their 1997 inventories on a  voluntary basis and on a mandatory basis for their 1998  inventories. They should also use them to recalculate the  base year inventory and submit updated time series data for  the years in between. Economies in transition may apply the  revised guidelines one year later than other Annex I  Parties.

Following comments from the EU and the PHILIPPINES on non- Annex I Parties' use of guidelines and methodologies for  inventories, ARGENTINA suggested text encouraging non-Annex  I Parties' to apply the revised 1996 guidelines in  communicating their national GHG inventories. SBSTA also  encouraged Parties to report actual emissions of HFCs, PFCs  and SF6 and figures for potential emissions. CHINA insisted  that Parties that are not in a position to report actual  figures should be 'encouraged' rather than requested to  report potential emissions. The SBSTA requested the  Secretariat to prepare a study on methodologies for  assessing emissions from harvested wood products.

## METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES

On Tuesday, 17 December, the SBSTA considered Agenda Item  4(a), Longer-term programme of work (FCCC/SBSTA/1996/16 and  Add.1). Delegates specifically considered priorities for  methodological work, implications for the budget and  necessary institutional and financial arrangements.

### PRIORITIES FOR METHODOLOGICAL WORK

Numerous countries,  including NEW ZEALAND, ECUADOR, the EU and the RUSSIAN  FEDERATION, supported the document's list of methodological  issues that warrant special consideration. These include  methods for (i) assessing mitigation measures and policies;  (ii) projecting emissions; (iii) evaluating and monitoring  the effectiveness of specific P&Ms; (iv) assessing  mitigation technologies; and (v) evaluating AIJ and  developing the concept of JI. The US said that no single  method would be universally applicable and called on the  SBSTA to avoid duplicating efforts, in particular with the  IPCC. He suggested that governments nominate experts to be  included in the process of developing methodologies.

MICRONESIA, supported by the MARSHALL ISLANDS, expressed  concern about channeling GEF funds and urged that higher  priority be given to adaptation methodology. AUSTRALIA  suggested giving the highest priority to methods for  assessing mitigation and emissions projections. He urged the  SBSTA to monitor real changes in GHG concentration in the  atmosphere, and to include this issue under methodological  topics. ECUADOR suggested giving priority to methods for  projecting emissions and for evaluating AIJ. NEW ZEALAND  prioritized methods for assessing mitigation measures,  projecting emissions and evaluating the effectiveness of  P&Ms. He reminded the IPCC not to engage in policy  recommendations.

The EU urged the SBSTA to play a supervisory role for  methodological work and requested that the Secretariat  review means of funding work on methodologies. AUSTRALIA  suggested additions to the Secretariat's budget. The  MARSHALL ISLANDS concurred with this and, supported by  ECUADOR, suggested requesting the governing bodies of  international organizations to give a high priority to work  in support of the FCCC process.

Informal consultations led to a draft conclusion, noting a  need for work on methodological issues relating to climate  change, encouraging cooperation on this with other bodies  and requesting the Secretariat to prepare an initial draft  work plan utilizing expert advice. In adopting the text,  language referring to methodological issues 'related to AIJ'  was deleted. KUWAIT proposed adding socio-economic analysis  to the list of methodological topics proposed. The EU  objected, but withdrew its objection in lieu of deferring  the entire conclusion to SBSTA-5.

### POSSIBLE REVISIONS TO THE GUIDELINES FOR THE PREPARATION OF  COMMUNICATIONS BY PARTIES INCLUDED IN ANNEX I OF THE  CONVENTION

On Agenda Item 4(b), Possible revisions to the  guidelines for the preparation of communications by Parties  included in Annex I to the Convention, the Secretariat  introduced three documents. Documents  FCCC/SBSTA/1996/9/Add.1 and Add.2 highlight electricity  trade, bunker fuels, use of global warming potentials  (GWPs), accounting for land-use change and forestry,  temperature adjustments, and present options for action.  Document FCCC/SBSTA/1996/MISC.5 contains comments from  Parties.

The MARSHALL ISLANDS, NORWAY, MICRONESIA and INDIA favored  deferring consideration of this issue and requesting Parties  to submit comments. The MARSHALL ISLANDS and INDIA said they  would allow provision of supplementary information based on  the documents. AUSTRALIA supported the revisions to  guidelines but called for work on defining anthropogenic  emissions.

The issue of adjustment was raised not only regarding  temperature adjustment, but also regarding electricity trade  and bunker fuels. Unadjusted reporting was generally  preferred, with supplemental adjusted figures. DENMARK noted  that his country experiences random electricity emissions  fluctuations due to climatic factors. He supported the  continued use of reporting on actual, as well as adjusted  levels of emissions, to correct for these fluctuations.

On the electricity trade, the US noted inconsistencies in  reporting on imports and exports due to ad hoc adjustments,  and called for emissions accounting where generated. Data on  the trade and related emissions should be supplemental. He  proposed that the Secretariat prepare a paper on electricity  trading. AUSTRALIA and NEW ZEALAND also favored the use of  unadjusted figures. AUSTRALIA noted that electricity trading  is part of the general issue of trade in high carbon  intensive commodities.

On international bunker fuels, the US recommended unadjusted  inventories but said supplemental data could include  averaging over some period in order to estimate progress  towards targets. Supported by NORWAY, he noted the need for  a methodology for consistent emissions allocation. The US  and NEW ZEALAND recommended narrowing the number of options  for further action. The RUSSIAN FEDERATION also urged  further work, particularly with other international  organizations. MICRONESIA sought clarification on bunker  fuels with regard to regionally- specific emission factors  and suggested a roundtable on bunker fuels for SBSTA-5.

On temperature adjustments, CANADA, AUSTRALIA, INDIA and  JAPAN favored unadjusted emissions reporting in inventories  and a separate method for treating adjustments. JAPAN called  for a unified approach to be discussed by the IPCC.  AUSTRALIA highlighted that temperature adjustments are based  on cyclical fluxes like other climatic events and,  therefore, should follow the same conceptual approach. He  proposed developing common national performance indicators  within SBSTA's work programmme and having countries use  these along with specific national ones.

On global warming potentials (GWPs), INDIA expressed concern  about inconsistencies in their use and asked for  comparability in reports. JAPAN suggested that Parties using  GWPs utilize the GWP guidelines adopted at COP-2, but  preferred reporting on GHGs gas-by-gas. NEW ZEALAND echoed  this call for caution on GWP use.

On land use and forestry, MICRONESIA called for clearer  definitions. AUSTRALIA noted that P&Ms cover all relevant  sources, sinks and reservoirs of GHGs and, therefore,  favored aggregating activities in all sectors for a 'net'  emissions figure. However, JAPAN noted methodological  problems in this category and NEW ZEALAND said the issue of  subtraction depends on resolving other issues. Both JAPAN  and NEW ZEALAND favored the 'net approach', but until these  problems are resolved JAPAN stated a preference for use of  gross figures.

### CONCLUSIONS

In the final session of the SBSTA on Wednesday,  18 December, conclusions were adopted that defer a decision  on revising the guidelines to a future session and request  further work on reporting on bunker and aviation fuel  emissions, electricity related emissions, and technical and  policy issues related to emissions adjustments and trade.  TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO, on behalf of AOSIS, proposed deleting  language making the option for no allocation of bunker fuels  a 'priority' for action. Following an EU objection, the  option for no allocation will be 'considered'. The  conclusion was adopted as amended.

## NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS FROM ANNEX I PARTIES

The Secretariat gave an oral report on national  communications for Annex I Parties, stating that 31 In-Depth  Reviews have been undertaken so far, 16 of which have been  issued and published. Responding to a request by AUSTRALIA,  the Secretariat later circulated the report as a conference  document (FCCC/SBSTA/ 1996/CRP.5). There were no further  interventions on this issue.

In its final session, SBSTA adopted conclusions, taking note  of the report and progress made in national communications  of Annex I Parties, urging Parties to submit their national  communications on time, and encouraging those that have not  yet nominated experts to do so.

## ACTIVITIES IMPLEMENTED JOINTLY

On activities implemented jointly (AIJ) under the pilot  phase, the Secretariat introduced the following documents:  the Uniform Reporting Format (URF)(FCCC/SBSTA/1996/15); an  update on AIJ (FCCC/SBSTA/1996/17); and methodological  issues on AIJ projects (FCCC/SBSTA/1996/19).

The US, JAPAN and AUSTRALIA strongly supported AIJ.  MAURITIUS, on behalf of the African Group, BELIZE and CHILE  supported AIJ as a supplement to the FCCC. The PHILIPPINES  noted misconceptions on AIJ and CHINA, MALAYSIA and INDIA  noted the 'blurring' of AIJ and JI. MALAYSIA, BELIZE, the  PHILIPPINES, UGANDA, INDIA and CHILE opposed AIJ as a means  of or conditionality for technology transfer or other  bilateral assistance. INDIA requested a Secretariat report  on the status of technology transfer.

The G-77/CHINA, supported by MAURITIUS, IRAN, ZIMBABWE, the  RUSSIAN FEDERATION, MOROCCO and the PHILIPPINES, called for  AIJ to be consistent with national development plans and  priorities, particularly in the development of a common  reporting framework. ZIMBABWE emphasized the voluntary  nature of AIJ. MOROCCO and ARGENTINA stressed the need for  project approval by both partner governments. UGANDA  underscored the good will of the business community and  public awareness on climate issues.

### UNIFORM REPORTING FORMAT

Modifications to language in the  Secretariat's document on URF were requested. VENEZUELA  highlighted: calculation of costs and benefits to the host  country's economy; comparison of effects on each partner  country; and evaluation of AIJ's potential to reduce  emissions cost-effectively. CANADA highlighted non- environmental benefits and opposed the inclusion of  confidential details in the tables. He suggested the use of  narrative text in reports. CHINA, supported by the US,  called for language rejecting credits for AIJ emissions  reductions during the pilot phase. JAPAN proposed language  on project implementation status and the provision of  information from the sub-national level. The INTERNATIONAL  ENERGY AGENCY called for the inclusion of data on technology  used in AIJ projects in the URF.

AUSTRALIA, MICRONESIA and ARGENTINA differentiated projects  under development from those being implemented. The EU and  COSTA RICA favored approved third-party reviews and  requested preparation of a workplan for AIJ reporting tasks.  The US, COSTA RICA and MICRONESIA called for an electronic  template for reporting, clear rules for participation and a  schedule for submissions. In the discussions on the update,  MALAYSIA warned against conversion of bilateral projects  into AIJ projects and ZIMBABWE drew attention to two AIJ  projects in his country and a future national workshop.

### METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES

Some developing countries criticized  the implicit assumption of benefits from AIJ in the  Secretariat's document. Supported by MAURITIUS, CHINA, IRAN,  MALAYSIA, MOROCCO and ARGENTINA, the G-77/CHINA called for  deletion of references to modalities for crediting. The US  felt that the pilot phase should assess all issues of AIJ,  including credits. AUSTRALIA proposed criteria for AIJ  including crediting, cost-effectiveness of projects and  additionality.

The PHILIPPINES, UGANDA, INDIA, SWITZERLAND, MAURITIUS and  the EU highlighted AIJ additionality to Annex II countries'  commitments. The G-77/CHINA stressed inclusion of financial  additionality among methodological issues. The EU also  underscored environmental additionality and monitoring and  verification procedures. MAURITIUS, supported by MOROCCO and  ZIMBABWE, welcomed AIJ contributions to capacity building in  developing countries, if they adhere to national objectives,  and asked the Secretariat to facilitate the initiation of  AIJ projects to African countries. SWITZERLAND also called  for identifying and meeting host countries' needs.

INDIA noted the need to take financial considerations into  account in discussing methodologies. CANADA stressed  minimization of transaction costs. ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA  called for methodologies to address adaptation issues.  MICRONESIA called for methodologies to help countries  determine emission reduction projections and supported  SWITZERLAND's request that the Secretariat develop a  directory related to AIJ work.

### CONCLUSIONS

During the SBSTA's last session on Wednesday,  18 December, delegates discussed how to recognize agreements  reached in a contact group on elements of the URF, while  leaving open the possibility for further discussion of other  elements and on methodologies. A draft conclusion on  continuing this work was proposed. The conclusions, as  amended, ask for a revision of the URF reflecting 'sections  that were agreed in the contact group' and leaving unchanged  sections that could not be addressed. It invites Parties to  submit views on the unresolved issues. AUSTRALIA and the US  proposed language on convening a contact group during SBSTA- 5 to further this work. ZIMBABWE proposed specifying the  voluntary nature of AIJ, and CHINA proposed making specific  reference to reports from Parties 'participating in the  pilot phase of AIJ.' The conclusions, as amended, were  adopted.

## DEVELOPMENT AND TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY

On Agenda Item 7, Development and transfer of technologies,  the Secretariat presented an oral report highlighting  identification of technology needs and various activities  underway. He noted document FCCC/SBSTA/1997/MISC.1 on this  topic, which will be presented at SBSTA-5, and document  FCCC/SBSTA/1996/CRP.2, listing nominations for a roster of  experts. SAUDI ARABIA requested a written version of the  Secretariat's oral report, which the Secretariat agreed to  provide.

The G-77/CHINA, supported by INDIA and CHINA, stressed the  importance of this topic for all countries, and expressed  deep concern over the continuing lack of progress and the  fact that most technology transfer is being undertaken  within the AIJ framework. The Secretariat noted that work on  this takes place in cooperation with other bodies. He noted  work on addressing technology transfer in communications  from Annex I Parties.

INDIA, supported by CHINA, noted that there were no experts  nominated from some countries. CHINA noted that groups  preparing documents on technology transfer should note that  technology transfer refers to environmentally sound  technologies, as defined in Agenda 21; full systems of  technologies and know-how, which fall within national  priorities. He reminded Parties to include information on  what they have done on technology transfer in their national  communications and called for a Secretariat compilation of  this information from Annex II Parties in order to  facilitate COP decisions. The adopted conclusions call for  an intensification of Secretariat work on these issues, but  note that only one country has submitted initial information  on technology needs in request to a COP-2 decision and,  therefore, extends the deadline.

## FINAL SESSION

A framework for the report of SBSTA-4 was adopted at the  final meeting on 18 December 1996 at 9:30 p.m. It will be  completed at a later stage. On Agenda Item 2, the election  of officers, the Chair reported on Monday morning that an  agreement had been reached as a result of informal  consultations. Some delegations expressed concern over the  agreement and the Chair postponed the announcement about the  election. Later that day, he announced that the election  would be postponed until SBSTA-5 due to difficulties in  reaching balanced regional representation.

# SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION

The fourth session of SBI (SBI-4) was convened from 10-11  December 1996. Delegates considered Agenda Item 3(a), the  only item on the SBI's agenda, concerning the Annex to the  Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the Conference of  the Parties (COP) and the Council of the Global Environment  Facility (GEF). The MOU was approved at SBI-2 and included a  provision for an annex on the determination of funding  necessary and available for the implementation of the  Convention. The secretariat drafted a proposal for the MOU  and the annex, which was adopted by the GEF Council prior to  COP-2 (FCCC/CP/1996/9).

At COP-2, SBI-3 considered the annex adopted by the GEF  (GEF-adopted annex), as well as an alternative annex  proposed by the G-77/China (FCCC/SBI/1996/L.4), but failed  to reach agreement. COP-2, in decision 13/CP.2, requested  SBI-4 to consider the GEF-adopted annex and the G-77/China's  proposed annex. At the opening of SBI-4, the G-77/China  submitted a revised draft proposal. Delegates also had  before them written comments submitted by Gambia, the EU and  the US (FCCC/SBI/1966/Misc.1).

The GEF-adopted annex recalls Article 11.3(d) of the  Convention, which calls for arrangements to determine in a  predictable and identifiable manner the amounts of funding  necessary and available for implementation. It notes that in  anticipation of a replenishment of the GEF, the COP will  make an assessment of the amount of funds necessary to  assist developing countries in fulfilling their commitments,  taking into account: the information communicated to the COP  under Article 12 (communication of information); national  programmes formulated under Article 4.1(b) of the  Convention; and information communicated to the COP from the  GEF on the number of eligible programmes and projects, the  number that were approved and the number that were turned  down owing to a lack of resources.

The G-77/China proposal, in addition to recalling Article  11.3(d), also recalls Article 4.7, which notes that  developing country implementation depends upon the  fulfillment of developed country commitments regarding  financial resources, and Article 4.8, which refers to  meeting the needs of developing countries arising from the  impacts of climate change. It also recommends taking into  account the funds necessary to meet: the full agreed costs  incurred in preparing developing countries' national  communications under Article 12.1, based on the guidelines  adopted at COP-2; the full incremental costs of measures  covered by Article 4.1; and the costs of adaptation to the  adverse effects of climate change. The proposal also calls  on the GEF to indicate the rationale by which the amount  described as 'new and additional' is regarded as such, vis- à-vis other sources of official development assistance.

SBI Chair Mohamed Ould El Ghaouth (Mauritania) stated that  he favored an efficient short session, without reopening a  formal debate. He called for an informal session to find  solutions in less than two days so that extra time could be  devoted to AGBM. He presented two options: delegates could  work with the GEF-adopted annex and make changes based on  the G-77/China proposal or draft a new proposal.

The PHILIPPINES noted that the G-77/China draft proposal  would avoid inconsistency with the Convention. She said the  GEF-adopted annex refers only to Article 4.1(b) (national  programmes), which amounts to 'picking and choosing' rather  than including all sections of the Article. She noted other  inconsistencies in the GEF-adopted annex in relation to  Article 4.3 on full incremental costs and new and additional  resources. She said the G-77/China proposal responds to the  needs of developing countries and noted that the GEF must  act in conformity with the FCCC. ARGENTINA, INDIA, IRAN and  KUWAIT supported the G-77/China proposal.

Several Parties expressed confusion regarding the G-77/China  proposal and requested clarification. The PHILIPPINES  described the proposal's provisions in detail and  highlighted the importance of funding the agreed full costs  for national communications and agreed full incremental  costs for all commitments under Article 4.1. INDIA said the  proposal recalled more articles of the Convention than the  GEF-adopted annex. It also clarifies the factors that  determine when funds should be given, incorporates the idea  that the COP, rather than the GEF, shall determine the  funding required, and calls for more transparency regarding  the reasons for project rejection.

The RUSSIAN FEDERATION noted that the G-77/China proposal  did not accurately reflect the language of the Convention.  She said the proposed language on adaptation refers to all  developing countries while the Convention refers only to  those that are 'particularly vulnerable.' CANADA and ITALY  also raised questions on the Convention language used in the  proposal. SWEDEN reminded delegates that decisions on  guidance to the GEF clearly state that national  communications will be financed.

JAPAN said that many delegations present at this meeting  were also present at the negotiations for the GEF-adopted  annex and the text should not be reopened. He also noted  that the roles of the COP and the GEF were spelled out in  the MOU and there was no need to reproduce paragraphs from  the Convention. The US supported retaining the specific  reference to national programmes because it provided a  context for projects. Past GEF projects have been approved  on an ad hoc basis but a coherent approach is emerging.  COSTA RICA offered to chair a contact group on the issue.

On Wednesday, 11 December, Amb. Manuel Dengo (Costa Rica)  presented the contact group's draft decision and draft  annex. In the draft decision, the SBI adopts the annex,  which is derived from the GEF-adopted annex, and transmits  it to the GEF Council for expeditous approval so that SBI-5  can recommend its adoption by COP-3.

The draft annex notes that the COP will make an assessment  of the amount of funds necessary to assist developing  countries, taking into account the funds necessary for both  the agreed full costs incurred in preparing national  communications and the information communicated to the COP  under Article 12 of the Convention. The draft annex states  that consideration must also be given to the funds necessary  for meeting the agreed full incremental costs of  implementing measures covered by Article 4.1, but with a  footnote that specifically mentions national plans or  programmes. It also notes that the GEF replenishment  negotiations will take into account 'fully and  comprehensively' the COP's assessment.

The US and the GEF stated that the GEF Council may not be  able to approve the annex as quickly as anticipated and  deleted the dates from the decision. The decision and annex  were then adopted. The Chair noted that a number of informal  appeals were made to regional groups at SBI-4 for  flexibility regarding the issue of the SBI Bureau, but that  the issue will be deferred until SBI-5.

# AD HOC GROUP ON ARTICLE 13

Chair Patrick Széll (UNITED KINGDOM) opened the third  session of the Ad Hoc Group on Article 13 (AG13-3) on  Monday, 16 December, and recalled that AG13-1 decided to  request Parties, non-Parties, intergovernmental and non- governmental organizations to make written submissions to a  questionnaire relating to a multilateral consultative  process (FCCC/AG13/1995/2, para.17). Delegates had before  them the responses to the questionnaire  (FCCC/AG13/1996/Misc.1 and Add.1, and Misc.2 and Add.1) and  a synthesis of the responses prepared by the Secretariat  (FCCC/AG13/1996/1).

The synthesis document notes responses from 19 Parties, one  non-Party and 10 NGOs. The document provides a spectrum of  views on the establishment of a multilateral consultative  process (MCP) and identifies emerging areas of consensus. It  outlines the responses to questions on: the definition and  scope of the process; the relationship of Article 13 to  Convention's institutions and processes; the legal and  procedural considerations; and other issues.

The Chair noted that AG13 has completed one year of work and  has focused on preparatory rather than substantive issues.  He reported that AG13 has received authority from the COP to  continue its work, but noted that the process is neither  clear nor simple. The key question to be addressed over the  next year will be the fundamental character of the regime.  Széll noted the panel presentation held at AG13-2 and his  conclusions, which are annexed to the report of AG13-2  (FCCC/AG13/1996/2). The Chair also reported the election of  Victor Chub (Uzbekistan) as Vice-Chair and Andrej Kranjc  (Slovenia) as Rapporteur. The Chair also distributed a paper  containing elements of an MCP (elements paper), which  addresses the possible characteristics, functions,  institutional arrangements and procedures for an MCP.

### CHARACTERISTICS

Under characteristics, the paper focuses on  defining the following for a future MCP: nature  (facilitative, cooperative, transparent); objective (find  solutions, non-confrontational, non-compliance, preventive);  expertise (legal, economic); application (optional,  compulsory); and evolution (static, dynamic, flexible).

In the discussion that followed, many delegates emphasized  that their comments were preliminary in nature. Several  delegations stressed that the work of AG13 must be based on  the language of Article 13 and noted that the open nature of  the Article allows Parties to define its structure.  Delegations also noted that the MCP should be non-binding,  non-adversarial and non-judicial. Delegates urged for an MCP  that is cooperative, transparent, practical and timely. Many  also noted the need to coordinate with the SBI and cautioned  against duplicating the work of the SBSTA. CANADA and JAPAN  noted that it must be flexible and evolve over time. The EU,  the RUSSIAN FEDERATION, CANADA and AUSTRIA highlighted an  MCP's potential to prevent disputes.

Differing positions emerged on other aspects of an MCP. The  EU suggested a new standing body that would consider  implementation questions, although decision-making power  should remain with the COP. SWITZERLAND called for a  permanent body with approximately 10 members that are  appointed by the COP. CHINA stated there was no need to  establish a new body. The EU drew comparisons to the non- compliance procedures under the Montreal Protocol, while the  RUSSIAN FEDERATION characterized the non-compliance  procedures as 'extremely complicated.' COSTA RICA, on behalf of the G-77/CHINA, said that review  mechanisms of the SBI and the SBSTA should be used in the  AG13 process. CHINA noted that an MCP should be invoked only  by Parties, involve discussions between Parties and should  not 'pass judgment' on implementation efforts. CANADA said  an MCP could involve a representative group of Parties with  expert input, if needed. The RUSSIAN FEDERATION suggested  that an MCP could be a special ad hoc group of experts on  legal and economic questions. JAPAN noted that the process  should only involve a limited number of Parties, otherwise  the SBI should be involved.

On Tuesday, 17 December, delegates provided additional  statements on characteristics. CANADA said that Parties  should be free to raise their own implementation issues. She  said that referring to the performance of other Parties  presents difficulties. The PHILIPPINES cautioned against  derogating the balance within the Convention and said an MCP  should be a consultative process and nothing else. She said  addressing compliance is by its nature confrontational.  CHINA reiterated that it was not urgent to establish an MCP.

Regarding an MCP's area of expertise, MOROCCO said that  legal, economic, social and technical issues should be  addressed. SWITZERLAND said technical and scientific issues  could be addressed unless it would duplicate other bodies'  work. The US and CANADA suggested drawing from a roster of  experts for consultation. Most countries agreed that the  application of an MCP should be optional rather than  compulsory, and stressed flexibility to accommodate future  needs. The EU noted that some elements regarding the  characteristics of an MCP need further consideration before  it can be finalized. She offered to draft a paper on points  of convergence that have already emerged. CHINA and KUWAIT  said it is premature to draw conclusions.

### FUNCTIONS

AG13 then considered an MCP's functions. The  Chair's list of elements on functions addresses ways to  define the 'questions regarding implementation.' It contains  sub-items on: the advisory or supervisory role of an MCP  (cooperation and support, noncompliance); the specific or  general nature of the issues to be addressed (country  performance, interpretation); the areas of competence  (communications, obligations, issues); and the relationship  to other Convention bodies, processes and articles.

Parties presented different views regarding an advisory or  supervisory approach. Some called for a supportive and  assisting function, whereas others supported a review  process on the performance of individual Parties. The EU  stated that an MCP is needed to solve the performance  problems of individual Parties. In no case would COP  decision-making authority be reduced. AUSTRIA noted that if  an MCP advises Parties on solving problems then questions of  individual performance must be part of the procedure. Many  countries, including CANADA, VENEZUELA, AUSTRALIA, IRAN and  SLOVENIA, supported an advisory approach. MOROCCO said an  MCP could play both an advisory and a supervisory role.  CHINA said an MCP must provide recommendations and be non- supervisory and non-judgmental. The US noted that Article  8.2(c) empowers the Secretariat to provide support to  Parties and urged delegates to keep an open mind. The  NETHERLANDS suggested that an MCP should function as a 'help  desk' where a Party with a problem can seek advice.

On the nature of issues to be addressed, the US expressed  concern on having an MCP interpret the Convention and noted  that this issue needs careful consideration. CANADA noted  that only Article 14 refers to interpretation and issues  might be referred to an MCP via Article 13. VENEZUELA said  that interpretation should be left to the COP. FRANCE  responded that the possible role in interpretation should  not be excluded. AUSTRALIA said an MCP could play a role in  interpreting or clarifying obligations through practical  assistance rather than judicial-style interpretation. CHINA  stated that many differences of opinion are due to  misinformation and an MCP could allow Parties to exchange  views on interpretation.

On the relationship of an MCP to other bodies, processes and  articles, many delegates cautioned against duplicating the  work of the SBI. MOROCCO said an MCP should adopt  recommendations and report to the COP independently of the  SBSTA and the SBI. KUWAIT noted the importance of  identifying the areas of concern for an MCP and said that  many of the issues presented here fall under existing  bodies. On the relationship between Articles 13 and 14,  JAPAN, VENEZUELA, MOROCCO and SLOVENIA noted that Articles  13 and 14 are clearly different. CHILE noted that Article 14  requires Parties to settle disputes through negotiation or  'any other peaceful means' and an MCP could provide this  type of advisory service.

### INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS

On institutional arrangements,  the Chair's elements paper addresses a future MCP's:  establishment (new institution, existing body); nature (ad  hoc, standing); size (open-ended, limited in size,  geographical representation); and constitution (government  representatives, experts, roster). It also proposes that  delegates consider a combination of all the elements  contained in the paper. Delegates commented on the  institutional arrangements and several reiterated that their  remarks were only preliminary.

Many delegates proposed the establishment of some type of  body, with a number preferring a standing body or committee,  with membership on a rotational basis, to provide a sense of  reliability. CANADA, ITALY, the EU, ZIMBABWE, SLOVENIA, the  PHILIPPINES and CHILE supported a standing committee. Others  envisioned an ad hoc group formed to address issues on an  'as needed' basis. The RUSSIAN FEDERATION favored an ad hoc  group of experts to expedite work on SBI documents. JAPAN  preferred an ad hoc group to address issues as identified by  the SBI. The NETHERLANDS cautioned that associating the  committee too closely with the SBI would hamper its freedom  of movement. KUWAIT stated that the creation of another  institution would be burdensome and noted that any group  formed should be linked to the SBI. The INTERNATIONAL  INSTITUTE FOR APPLIED SYSTEMS ANALYSIS (IIASA) noted that  delegates can have both a committee and an ad hoc group, and  provided examples of this approach from the Montreal  Protocol and the International Labor Organization.

Equitable geographic distribution was a frequently mentioned  consideration, although a number of delegations noted it  would be difficult to achieve. CANADA, the EU, ZIMBABWE,  ITALY, MOROCCO, the PHILIPPINES and CHILE called for  equitable geographic representation. The PHILIPPINES and  CHINA proposed forming an open-ended group, but cautioned  that limiting the size could also limit equitable  geographical distribution. The US urged delegates to  consider criteria other than equitable geographic  distribution. He suggested using existing categories such as  Annex I countries, countries with economies in transition,  developing countries and least developed countries. He also  suggested rotating seats; representation for the Party  requesting assistance; and ex officio seats for Chairs of  other subsidiary bodies. JAPAN supported using other  criteria and the NETHERLANDS supported further consideration  of ex officio representation for SBI and SBSTA.

Many Parties preferred using government representatives or  government-appointed experts. Some also called for a roster  from which to select experts depending on the nature of the  problem. Some delegates proposed a combination of these  elements. The EU suggested including members from various  fields, such as legal, economic, social, technical,  environmental, scientific and technological. ZIMBABWE stated  that individual Parties should decide whether committee  members are delegates, national NGOs or others. CHINA  preferred governmental officials who are experts on Article  13. ITALY proposed ensuring stability through the election  of a president and a vice-president, and appointing members  on the principle of rotation, with two-year memberships.  KUWAIT suggested drawing experts from the SBSTA and the  IPCC.

### PROCEDURES

On procedures, the Chair's elements paper  addresses: establishment of the process (COP decision,  amendment, protocol); the governing body for the process  (COP, SBI, other); the procedure for raising issues  (Parties, SBI, COP, Secretariat); the result of the process  (recommendations to SBI or the COP); and the frequency of  deliberations.

A majority of delegations stated that a COP decision was the  most appropriate action for establishing the process. On a  governing body, most delegates stated that the COP would act  as final arbiter, while many stated that the SBI could serve  as a useful intermediary. A number of delegations noted that  the ability to raise issues should be limited to Parties.  KUWAIT, IRAN and INDIA said that issues taken up should be  restricted to those submitted by Parties and subsidiary  bodies. Delegates agreed that an MCP should produce  recommendations, but expressed different views on whether to  forward the recommendations to the SBI or directly to the  COP.

### CONCLUSIONS

On Wednesday, 18 December, the Chair presented  his draft conclusions and a revised elements paper.  Delegates also considered an EU-proposed draft report on  points of convergence on the characteristics of an MCP and  the draft report of the meeting. The Chair reminded  delegates to regard this meeting and the February 1997  meeting as two parts of a single whole. This meeting was  only intended to take stock, but the February meeting will  not have the luxury of being so 'loosely woven.' The Chair's draft conclusions state that AG13-3: reiterates  that the work of the group is conducted within the framework  set by Article 13; notes that the elements, which will be  listed in an annex to the report of the meeting, are  recorded without prejudice to any decision on the  establishment of an MCP; invites Parties to submit any  further proposals; and requests the Secretariat to issue any  proposals received by 15 February 1997.

On the revised elements paper, the US suggested that an  additional objective for an MCP is to 'provide assistance to  Parties' and to include scientific and technological issues  as an area of expertise. The RUSSIAN FEDERATION proposed  specifically addressing the 'mandate' of an MCP at future  meetings. IRAN proposed amending 'geographical  representation' to 'equitable' geographical representation.  CANADA, supported by the RUSSIAN FEDERATION, proposed  deleting a 'protocol' as a possible way of establishing an  MCP. The elements paper was adopted as amended.

The EU's proposed report on points of convergence states  that a 'high degree of some convergence' was recorded with  regard to characteristics, such as: the nature should be  facilitative, co-operative, non-confrontational, transparent  and non-judicial; the objective should be to assist Parties  in questions of implementing the Convention, solve problems  and prevent potential disputes; the evolution of the process  should be flexible; duplication of existing institutions and  procedures should be avoided in designing the procedure; the  process should be separate and without prejudice to Article  14; and the MCP should be advisory in nature. The proposed  report further notes that many Parties stated further  elaboration of the MCP would imply dealing with  interpretation matters and that caution would be needed in  this area.

CHINA, the PHILIPPINES, IRAN, JAPAN, THAILAND, CHILE, the  RUSSIAN FEDERATION, GAMBIA, KUWAIT and MOROCCO said it would  be premature to make conclusions on areas of convergence  because the process is still evolving and contributions have  been preliminary. The EU withdrew its informal proposal.

Delegates then considered the draft report of the meeting  (FCCC/AG13/1996/L.1). The US, referring to the summary of  the Chair's opening statement, recalled that the Chair had  noted the 'potential' link between the work of the AG13 and  the AGBM. He also proposed deleting a reference to the  process 'to be established' because delegates have not  agreed that a process should be established. The report was  adopted, as amended.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR BEFORE COP-3

## CLIMATE CHANGE

### FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE

The next meetings of  the subsidiary bodies to the FCCC are scheduled for 24  February - 7 March 1997. SBSTA-5, SBI-4 and AG13-4 will be  held 25-28 February and AGBM-6 will be held 3-7 March. The  subsidiary bodies will meet again from 28 July - 7 August  1997 and from 20-31 October 1997. All of these meetings will  take place in Bonn. COP-3 is scheduled to take place in  Kyoto, Japan, from 1-12 December 1997. For information  contact the FCCC Secretariat in Bonn, Germany, tel: +49-228- 815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail:  secretariat@unfccc.de. Also try the Secretariats' home page  at http://www.unfccc.de and UNEP's Information Unit for  Conventions at http://www.unep.ch/iuc.html.

### INTERNATIONAL WORKSHOP ON THE PREPARATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE  ACTION PLANS

This workshop, co-sponsored by the Indonesian  Ministry of the Environment and the US Country Studies  Program, is scheduled for January 1997. The workshop will  provide a forum for countries to share their experiences and  preliminary results from their planning activities, as well  as training and technical assistance to countries on the  preparation of climate change action plans. Participation is  open to all countries. For information contact: Sandy Guill,  USCSP, P.O. Box 63, 1000 Independence Avenue, SW,  Washington, DC 20585, USA, tel: +1-202-426-1464; fax: +1- 202-426-1540 or 1551; e-mail: sguill@igc.apc.org.

### CONFERENCE ON AIJ FROM THE PERSPECTIVE OF DEVELOPING  COUNTRIES

At the initiative of the Netherlands, Development  Alternatives is organizing a Conference on AIJ from the  perspective of developing countries from 8-10 January 1997  in New Delhi, India. The objectives of the Conference are:  to evaluate activities that are planned to be implemented  jointly by Annex I and non-Annex I Parties; to assess  learning experiences from current and proposed projects; to  promote the role of the private sector and NGOs in AIJ; and  to contribute to formulating a methodology to design a pilot  phase AIJ project and develop indicators to measure local  and global benefits. For more information contact: K.  Chatterjee, Conference Coordinator, Development  Alternatives, B-32 Qutab Institutional Area, Hauz Khaz, New  Delhi 110016, India, tel: +91 11 66 5370 or +91 11 65 7938;  fax: +91 11 68 66031; e-mail: tara@sdalt.ernet.in.

### WORKSHOPS ON THE SADC POWER POOL AND CO2 ABATEMENT  OPPORTUNITIES FOR ZIMBABWE

These workshops, scheduled for  the second and fourth quarters of 1997, will be held in  Harare, Zimbabwe, and are sponsored by the German Agency for  Technical Cooperation (GTZ). The workshops will focus on the  creation of a common project output base and provide a forum  for exchange between policy makers and technical resource  persons. For more information, contact Holger Liptow, Energy  Division, GTZ; tel: +49-6196-79-3282; fax: +49-6169-79-7144;  e-mail: gtz-co2@geod.geonet.de.

### CC

TRAIN TRAINING WORKSHOPS: The CC:TRAIN programme intends  to conduct a series of training workshops during the first  and second quarter of 1997. The workshops will focus on  vulnerability and adaptation assessment; mitigation  analysis; national GHG emissions inventories and national  implementation strategies. For information contact Stephen  Gold, Technical Coordinator, CC:TRAIN; tel: (+41 22) 789- 5850; fax: (+41 22) 733-1383; e-mail: sgold.unitar@unep.ch.

# COMMISSION ON SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

### CSD

The CSD Intersessional Working Group, which will  address preparations for the upcoming Special Session of the  UN General Assembly, is scheduled to meet from 24 February -  7 March 1997. The fifth session of the CSD is scheduled for  7-25 April 1997. The Special Session of the UN General  Assembly for review of the implementation of Agenda 21 is  scheduled for 23-27 June 1997. For information on the CSD  contact: Andrey Vasilyev, UN Division for Sustainable  Development, tel: +1-212-963-5949; fax: +1-212-963-4260; e- mail: vasilyev@un.org. Also try the UN Department for Policy  Coordination and Sustainable Development's (DPCSD) Home Page  at http://www.un.org/DPCSD.

### FOURTH SESSION OF THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON FORESTS

IPF-4 will be held in New York from 11-21 February 1997. For  more information contact: Elizabeth Barsk-Rundquist. tel:  +1-212 963-3263; fax: +1-212-963-1795; e-mail: barsk- rundquist@un.org. Also try the UN Department for Policy  Coordination and Sustainable Development (DPCSD) Home Page  at http://www.un.org/DPCSD.

# GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY

### GEF COUNCIL

The proposed schedule of GEF Council Meetings  in 1997 includes: 18-19 May, NGO Consultation; 20-22 May,  GEF Council Meeting; 2-3 November, NGO Consultation; and 4-6  November, GEF Council Meeting. For more information contact  Marie Morgan at the GEF Secretariat, tel: +1-202-473-1128;  fax: +1-202-522-3240. Also try the GEF web site at:  http://www.worldbank.org/html/gef.