---
title: "HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE MEETINGS OF THE FCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES, THURSDAY, 10 JUNE 1999"
id: enb12109e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12109e
date: 1999-06-10
abstract: "The Joint Working Group on compliance met in the morning to  consider the draft report of the meeting. The Subsidiary Body  for Implementation (SBI) and the Subsidiary Body for Scientific  and Technological Advice (SBSTA) met in the evening to adopt  draft conclusions and decisions. Contact groups were convened on  the budget and Annex I communications."
---

# JOINT WORKING GROUP ON COMPLIANCE

The Joint Working Group (JWG) on compliance discussed the  meeting's draft report. Co-Chair Rønneberg proposed including a  paragraph noting that the JWG had agreed on the need for a  workshop on compliance after COP-5 and between the 11th and 12th  sessions of the subsidiary bodies (SB-11 and SB-12). SAUDI  ARABIA sought clarification on the meeting's arrangements and  agenda. The G-77/CHINA, supported by the MARSHALL ISLANDS, SAUDI  ARABIA, INDONESIA and BRAZIL, proposed convening the workshop  immediately prior to COP-5's opening, to ensure stronger  developing country participation. On guidelines for the  workshop's agenda, she called for a general exchange of views on  principles and experiences with other conventions. There would  be no negotiated outcome. The EU, supported by JAPAN and the US,  proposed de-coupling the workshop with the COP-5 process, noting  that there will be too many competing responsibilities.  AUSTRALIA, with CANADA, proposed holding the workshop well in  advance of COP-5 to ensure that participants will have time to  fully benefit from the discussions. RUSSIA suggested exercising  caution in approaching the experiences of other conventions, as  the FCCC is unique. Co-Chair Rønneberg suspended the meeting to  allow for informal consultations.

Based on these consultations, Co-Chair Rønneberg produced a  draft text that: requests the Secretariat to convene a workshop  prior to COP-5; notes the need to facilitate developing country  participation; and outlines the workshop's agenda. The G-77/CHINA, with SAUDI ARABIA and IRAN, stressed the need to  ensure that those developing country participants interested in  attending are sponsored. In the afternoon, delegates reconvened  to consider the draft report and debated references to, inter  alia, the type of report resulting from the workshop. Delegates  agreed to paragraphs stating that the Co-Chairs will organize a  workshop in early October 1999. The purpose of the workshop will  be to informally exchange views, including experiences under  other conventions. The Co-Chairs will make a factual, informal  report, with no recommendations, on this workshop. The JWG urged  all Parties in a position to facilitate developing country  participation to make voluntary contributions. The JWG also  agreed that a workshop is needed after COP-5 and between SB-11  and SB-12.

# SBSTA

Chair Chow invited Parties to consider guidelines for the  preparation of national communications (FCCC/SBSTA/1999/L.5 and  Add.1). He informed delegates that discussion on the non- inventory part of the guidelines relating to projections,  policies and measures, financial resources and transfer of  technology, and other matters, was not concluded in the contact  group convened at this session, and will continue at SBSTA-11.

In a section of the draft conclusions requesting Parties not  using the common reporting format for certain sectoral  background data tables on LULUCF to specify alternative formats,  CHINA added a specific reference noting that this request  included Annex I Parties. On the proposed title for the non- inventory part of the guidelines, the EU suggested shortening it  to read 'UNFCCC reporting guidelines on national reports,' as  agreed in the contact group. ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA said the title  should not be amended until consideration of the content had  been completed. Delegates agreed to retain the current title but  with a note that it will be subject to further discussion at SB- 11. In addition, CHINA deleted reference to an instruction that  a document reflecting the status of discussions on the non- inventory part of the guidelines be produced 'in English only.'  Delegates adopted the documents as amended. Chair Chow noted  that they will be forwarded to SBI for its consideration.

On the draft conclusions on cooperation with relevant  international organizations, (FCCC/SBSTA/1999/L.7), the EU and  ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA inquired about the joint project on capacity  building between the UN agencies and the Secretariat, noting  that Parties were not aware of the details. The EU deleted text  that she said implied approval by Parties of the joint project.  She suggested referring to 'the development of a joint project'  and proposed that SBSTA request the Secretariat to provide  further information for consideration by Parties no later than  SB-11. ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA, supported by the EU, deleted  references to 'within available resources' and 'resources  permitting.' Regarding cooperation with other conventions, SWITZERLAND said  cooperation should not only be limited to the secretariats.  CANADA, with ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA, stated that whereas broad  cooperation between the conventions was desirable, it is still  unclear how it would work, and preferred retaining the current  language. Delegates adopted the draft conclusions as amended.

On the draft conclusions on LULUCF (FCCC/SBSTA/1999/L.9),  ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA questioned a sentence he said could be  interpreted as signaling that substantive decision-making on  LULUCF will take place at SBSTA-11. After lengthy discussions,  delegates agreed to delete the text that some delegations said  was ambiguous. The draft conclusions were adopted as amended.

# SBI

Delegates met in an evening session to consider draft  conclusions on aspects of national communications from non-Annex  I Parties. On the input from Parties to the GEF review of  enabling activities, delegates adopted conclusions requiring:  the GEF to include in its annual reports to the COP information  about progress made on the GEF review; and the Secretariat to  prepare a report on efforts to assist developing countries in  the implementation of enabling activities. The PHILIPPINES  deleted a reference to the scope of enabling activities,  including various activities that facilitate the implementation  of Convention Articles 4.1 (national inventories) and 12.1  (national communications).

On the provision of financial and technical support, delegates  adopted conclusions asking the Secretariat to request GEF to  provide dates of disbursement of funds for enabling-activity  projects for preparation of non-Annex I initial national  communications. The PHILIPPINES, with the EU, suggested  continuing consideration of this issue at the next session. The  conclusions also suggested that the list of projects submitted  by non-Annex I Parties be brought to the attention of GEF and  'as appropriate' other financing agencies, and required the  contact group's Co-Chairs to prepare a framework on elements of  a draft decision, based on proposals by the G-77/CHINA and the  EU. Debates centered on the positioning of the words 'as  appropriate,' whether it should be before or after 'GEF' and the  nature of information the Secretariat should require of the GEF,  whether it should be 'dates of disbursement of funds' or 'the  status and factors of implementation of' enabling activity  projects.

On timing for non-Annex I national communications, the SBI  considered draft conclusions by the Co-Chairs of the contact  group, including proposed draft decisions by the G-77/CHINA and  the EU as annexes. An amendment was proposed by the PHILIPPINES  requesting the Co-Chairs of the contact group on non-Annex I  communications to prepare a document providing a framework for  'elements for draft decisions,' based on the G-77/CHINA and the  EU proposals contained in the annexes. The EU requested that the  annexes reflect the proposals as originally submitted. The  conclusions were adopted as amended.

Delegates also considered draft conclusions on different aspects  of national communications by Annex I Parties. Conclusions were  adopted on annual inventories of national greenhouse gas data  for 1996 and on a future review process, including that under  Articles 7 and 8 (communication and review of information) of  the Kyoto Protocol. Conclusions referred by SBSTA to SBI were  also considered. On FCCC reporting guidelines on projections,  policies and measures, financial resources, transfer of  technology and other matters, CANADA noted SBSTA's agreement to  hold further discussion. Conclusions referred by SBSTA on review  processes for GHG inventories of Annex I Parties and a work  programme on methodological issues relating to Articles 5  (methodological issues), 7 and 8 of the Protocol were adopted.

# CONTACT GROUPS AND INFORMAL CONSULTATIONS

## Budget

The contact group met in a morning session to continue  discussing proposed SBI conclusions and a draft decision to COP- 5 on the programme budget for the biennium 2000-2001. The group  also considered two tables. One summarizes the proposed budget  for the 2000-2001 biennium amounting to a total of US$25.277  million. The other outlines the budget for Secretariat staffing.  The FCCC Executive Secretary, indicated that the proposed budget  reduces funds allocated to programme activities in 2000 and  increases those available in 2001. He noted that the staffing  table reflects a proposed reduction of staff from 100 to 81. A  group of countries requested that the revised proposed budget  reflect the priority to be given to the CDM through inclusion of  a separate programme. Several delegations noted the need for  more detail on programme activities and staffing in the budget.  The group undertook a paragraph-by-paragraph discussion of the  proposed SBI conclusions and draft decision. The discussion  focused on bracketed text in the draft decision approving carry- overs to cover part of the budget period and approving a  contingency budget for non-Annex I communications. The group  agreed to text approving a draw-down of US$2 million from the  unspent balance or contributions (carry-overs) from the previous  biennium to cover part of the 2000-2001 budget.  The provision  on a contingency budget for non-Annex I communications remained  bracketed.

Annex I Communications: The contact group on Annex I  communications met in the afternoon to consider the non- inventory part of the draft guidelines. The group accepted  wording on several paragraphs and exchanged views on text and a  table relating to policies and measures. Participants suggested  numerous amendments to the table. Several delegates noted the  need to consider this complex issue further. In considering how  to advance the issue, the group agreed that one document should  be produced containing Parties' ideas and remaining brackets, as  well as any redrafting considered necessary by the Co-Chairs to  reflect and synthesize ideas emerging from discussions. The  contact group is scheduled to continue its deliberations.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

As negotiations at the subsidiary bodies draw to a close,  observers have noted that an undeclared truce between the EU and  the Umbrella Group on the issue of ceilings has held up.  Participants report that the issue is unlikely to be tackled  until it forms part of a negotiated package at COP-6. Later in  the day, many delegates also indicated that agreement had been  reached on a way to proceed on the Protocol mechanisms, despite  conflicting rumors throughout the day.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

## Joint SBI/SBSTA Plenary

The joint session is expected to meet  at 10:00 am.

Annex I Communications: The group is expected to convene at 1:00  pm.

SBSTA Plenary: SBSTA is expected to meet at 3:00 pm.

SBI Plenary: SBI is expected to meet at 3:00 pm.

For other meetings, consult the meeting board.