---
title: "SUMMARY OF THE UNFCCC/UNDP EXPERT MEETING ON METHODOLOGIES FOR TECHNOLOGY NEEDS ASSESSMENTS: 23-25 APRIL 2002"
id: enb12191e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12191e
date: 2002-04-25
abstract: "The Expert Meeting on Methodologies for Technology Needs  Assessments was held from 23-25 April 2002, at the office of the  Korea Energy Management Corporation (KEMCO) in Yongin, Republic of  Korea. The meeting was organized by the United Nations Framework  Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the United Nations  Development Programme (UNDP) and hosted by the Government of the  Republic of Korea. Approximately 60 representatives of  governments, United Nations agencies and other intergovernmental  and international organizations attended the meeting."
---

The objective of the Expert Meeting was to identify and provide  technical advice on the methodologies and tools needed to  undertake technology needs assessments. During the workshop,  participants met in plenary sessions to: hear an overview of the  issue and country case studies; identify the elements of needs  assessments; consider activities and initiatives on technology  transfer; and examine possible post-needs assessment activities.  Participants also convened in working groups to develop  recommendations on methodologies and tools for assessing  technology needs, as well as on the types of assistance required  to carry out such assessments.

The findings of the workshop will be reported by the Chair of the  UNFCCC Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice  (SBSTA) to the SBSTA at its sixteenth session in June 2002.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE UNFCCC AND TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER

Climate change is considered one of the most serious threats to  the sustainability of the world's environment, human health and  well-being, and the global economy. Mainstream scientists agree  that the Earth's climate is being affected by the build-up of  greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide, caused by human  activities. A majority of scientists believe that prompt  precautionary action is necessary.

### UNFCCC

The international political response to climate change  took shape with the development of the United Nations Framework  Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). Adopted in 1992, the UNFCCC  sets out a framework for action aimed at stabilizing atmospheric  concentrations of greenhouse gases at a level that would prevent  human-induced actions from leading to 'dangerous interference'  with the climate system. The UNFCCC entered into force on 21 March  1994. It now has 186 Parties.

### TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER

Technology transfer is considered a key  element in combating climate change under the UNFCCC. Technology  transfer activities have been on the agenda of every session of  the SBSTA and Conference of the Parties (COP). UNFCCC Article 4.5,  which addresses the need for technology transfer, states that  'developed country Partiesshall take all practicable steps to  promote, facilitate and finance, as appropriate, the transfer of,  or access to, environmentally sound technologies and know-how to  other Parties, particularly developing country Parties, to enable  them to implement the provisions of the Convention,' adding that  'in this process, the developed country Parties shall support the  development and enhancement of endogenous capacities and  technologies of developing country Parties.'

### TECHNOLOGY NEEDS ASSESSMENTS

Parties addressed the issue of  assessing technology needs at COP-4, held in Buenos Aires in 1998.  COP-4 adopted a decision urging non-Annex I Parties (developing  countries), in light of their social and economic conditions, to  submit their prioritized technology needs, especially those  relating to key technologies, to address climate change in  particular sectors of their economies (FCCC/CP/1998/16/Add1).  Recognizing the limited resources of non-Annex I Parties, the COP  directed the Global Environment Facility (GEF) to provide funding  to developing countries to identify and submit to the COP their  prioritized technology needs (decision 2/CP.4).

There are currently 51 countries that are in the process of  assessing their technology needs under the GEF through UNDP and  UNEP. However, the lack of standardized guidelines for needs  assessments presents a challenge to countries implementing these  assessments. Addressing this issue, Parties at COP-7, in Marrakesh  in November 2001, adopted a framework for meaningful and effective  actions to enhance the implementation of UNFCCC Article 4.5  (decision 4/CP.7). In this context, the COP also requested the  Chair of the SBSTA, assisted by the Secretariat, to organize a  meeting with representatives from governments, experts drawn from  the UNFCCC roster of experts, and representatives from relevant  international organizations, to identify methodologies needed to  undertake technology needs assessments and to report its findings  to the SBSTA at its 16th session in June 2002  (FCCC/CP/2001/13/Add.1).

# REPORT OF THE WORKSHOP

## SESSION ONE: OPENING SESSION

The UNFCCC/UNDP Expert Meeting on Methodologies for Technology  Needs Assessments opened on Tuesday morning, 23 April. The event  was chaired by SBSTA Chair Halldor Thorgeirsson, who welcomed  participants, underlining that this gathering provided an  important opportunity for advancing implementation of the  provisions of the UNFCCC relating to technology transfer.

Kim Dong Won, Deputy Minister for the Republic of Korea's Ministry  of Commerce, Industry and Energy, highlighted the importance of  technology transfer in addressing the global challenge of climate  change. He informed participants that his country had recently  implemented its first three-year plan, and had just embarked on  its second three-year plan, which includes several measures for  developing appropriate technologies and encouraging private sector  participation. He said the Republic of Korea planned to play a  bridging role between developed and developing countries in  promoting technology transfer.

Janos Pasztor, Coordinator of the UNFCCC's Sustainable Development  Programme, welcomed participants, noting that the Republic of  Korea - which has made a dramatic economic and industrial  transition in recent decades - provided a 'perfect backdrop' to a  meeting on technology transfer. He drew attention to the COP-7  decision on this issue (decision 4/CP.7), which established a  framework for technology transfer. Highlighting that this meeting  was a direct outcome of the COP-7 decision, he welcomed the  UNFCCC-UNDP cooperation in organizing this event. On arrangements  within the UNFCCC, he drew attention to the establishment of a new  Programme on Sustainable Development, noting that the issue of  technology transfer, which was formerly dealt with under the  Science and Technology Programme, would now be addressed under  this new Programme. He thanked the Government of the Republic of  Korea for hosting this meeting, and KEMCO for providing its  facilities.

## SESSION TWO: OVERVIEW AND COUNTRY CASE STUDIES

This session, which aimed to provide an overview of the technology  transfer issue and some country case studies, took place on  Tuesday morning, 23 April. The session began with a briefing on  technology transfer in the context of the UNFCCC that outlined the  meeting's objectives and presented an overview of the technology  transfer programme. Participants then heard presentations and  engaged in discussions on a working paper exploring tools and  methodologies in assessing technology needs, and concluded the  session by considering case study presentations identifying  country approaches and challenges in needs assessments.

### PRESENTATION ON TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER IN THE CONTEXT OF THE CLIMATE  CHANGE CONVENTION

Wanna Tanunchaiwatana, Manager, Technology,  UNFCCC Secretariat, introduced the issue of technology transfer in  the context of the UNFCCC, outlined the meeting's objectives, and  provided an overview of the meeting's agenda. On relevant  provisions of the Convention, she highlighted Articles 4.5 and  4.7, noting that Article 4.5 establishes the need for technology  transfer between developed and developing countries, while Article  4.7 stresses that the Convention cannot be adequately implemented  by developing countries without financial assistance and  technology transfer from developed countries. She observed that  the Marrakesh Accords agreed to at COP-7 set the stage for  developing a framework for technology transfer (decision 4/CP.7),  and that the newly-established Expert Group on Technology Transfer  (EGTT) has a significant role to play in implementing the  framework.

She outlined the goals of this meeting, which include: providing  the SBSTA with technical advice on available tools and  methodologies; identifying the different barriers and means to  overcome these barriers; discussing the processes and main  elements of technology needs assessments; recommending to SBSTA  tools, methodologies and processes in assessing technology needs;  and describing potential follow-up activities that may be pursued  by the different stakeholders. She concluded by drawing attention  to the meeting's expected outcomes, which include: compilation of  technical papers for reference by the SBSTA and other interested  Parties; identification of tools, methodologies and processes; and  identification of possible follow-up activities/actions of the  different stakeholders after the process of identifying  technological needs is complete.

### PRESENTATION OF THE WORKING PAPER: EXPLORING TOOLS AND  METHODOLOGIES IN ASSESSING TECHNOLOGY NEEDS:

Zou Ji, UNFCCC  Consultant, and Yolando Velasco, Programme Officer, Technology,  UNFCCC Secretariat, jointly presented a working paper on Exploring  Tools and Methodologies in Assessing Technology Needs. The working  paper provides an overview of the concepts of technology needs  assessments and methodologies used by different institutions, and  discusses various methodological options for assessing technology  needs in support of UNFCCC Article 4.5. Yolando Velasco defined  technology needs assessment as 'a set of country-driven activities  that identify and determine the mitigation and adaptation  technology priorities, involving different stakeholders in a  consultative process to identify the barriers and measures to  address these barriers through sectoral analyses.' On the process of technology needs assessment, Zou Ji highlighted  three models: the Climate Technology Initiative (CTI) model, the  UNEP model, and the UN Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD)  model. While the models differ in their details, Zou Ji observed  that in general they all stress the importance of stakeholder  input and a well-defined implementation stage. He suggested that,  based on the analysis of the three models, a general process of  technology needs assessment can be elaborated, which involves:establishing criteria for evaluation of each technology by  integrating core social and economic goals; identifying different technology options; describing the characteristics of different technologies and  evaluating them with the above criteria; ascertaining the opinions of different stakeholders on  technology preferences and synthesizing these opinions; ranking/prioritizing technology needs; summarizing and reporting the results of assessment; and setting-up a link with follow-up activities, such as design,  execution and action plan.

Barriers to this process include, inter alia, difficulties in  identifying the right stakeholders and experts, a low level of  awareness about the climate change problem, and the challenge of  keeping the list of candidate technologies updated.

### DISCUSSANTS

Following these presentations, Chair Thorgeirsson  invited two discussants, Rawleston Moore (Barbados) and Jørgen  Fenhann (UNEP-Risoe), to comment on the working paper. Rawleston  Moore said the paper made it clear that no one methodology would  fit the unique circumstances of all countries. He highlighted  concerns about how to overcome barriers to progress on this issue  and how to integrate assessment concerns in the wider context of  Agenda 21. He suggested that more information on the costs  associated with the different stages of needs assessments would be  of value. In response, Zou Ji indicated that costs were hard to  determine, although it was likely that major costs might be  incurred at the survey stage.

Jørgen Fenhann said that although technology needs assessment was  a fairly new concept, it was not necessary to start afresh on this  issue, as there was already a great deal of relevant information  and experience that could be built on in developing relevant  methodologies. He drew attention to the paper's treatment of both  'soft' and 'hard' technologies, and its reference to both  mitigation and adaptation technologies. He identified the  challenge of turning the existing theory on technology transfer  into a reality, cautioning that the 'devil is in the details.'

###     Discussion:

In the ensuing discussion, a number of delegates  cautioned against adopting a 'one-size-fits-all' approach to  methodologies, which they said should be flexible enough to  reflect countries' unique circumstances. One developed country  speaker urged consideration of who would carry out and use the  work on methodologies for technology needs assessments.  Highlighting the significant role of the private sector, he noted  that the question being addressed at this meeting appeared to  relate to the public sector, and said his country would be  unlikely to ask the question of what its technology needs are in  this way. In response, another developed country participant  stressed UNFCCC commitments and public-private sector linkages,  which he said meant that strategies on technology transfer are  necessary for all countries.

Summarizing the discussion, Chair Thorgeirsson drew attention to  comments that methodologies should be able to be improved and  revised to reflect increased knowledge and information gathered  over time. He noted concerns that methodologies should not become  overly complex and rigid, as this could form an obstacle to  further progress. He highlighted participants' comments that  methodologies should build on previous knowledge and not try to  'reinvent the wheel,' as well as statements highlighting the need  for a country-driven approach that fits climate change strategies  within each country's broader development goals. He drew attention  to speakers' questions on the various actors involved in  technology needs assessments, including who should be doing the  work and for whom. He also noted comments on the need to address  adaptation as well as mitigation to climate change in the context  of technology transfer.

### COUNTRY CASE STUDY PRESENTATIONS ON TECHNOLOGY NEEDS ASSESSMENTS

Javier Hanna Figueroa (Bolivia) and William Kojo Agyemang-Bonsu  (Ghana) presented case studies on how technology needs assessment  was approached in their respective countries. Javier Hanna  Figueroa said Bolivia's experience was generally consistent with  the working paper. He stressed that reducing vulnerability to  climate change, which is a key issue for developing countries,  means that the transfer of technology for adaptation can be  particularly important. He underscored the need to strengthen  international coordination to provide access to useful information  on technology transfer opportunities. He reported on key elements  of Bolivia's assessment, including the promotion of sustainable  development, with a particular focus on the energy, industrial  processes, and the forestry sectors.

On Ghana's experience, William Kojo Agyemang-Bonsu noted that an  important element in its approach to technology needs assessment  was the sectoral experts/core teams, which undertake in-depth  analysis on, inter alia: sectoral policies and programmes;  systemic, human or institutional barriers; and the market  potential of the selected technologies. To prioritize Ghana's  technology needs, he emphasized that the technology must  contribute to wider development needs, including job creation,  poverty reduction, and capacity building. In addition, he noted  that technology needs are evaluated based on their contribution to  reducing greenhouse gases. He said Ghana has identified industrial  efficiency improvements and demand-side management as the highest  technology priority areas in the energy sector.

###     Discussion:

In the subsequent discussion, participants' comments  focused on:the importance of adaptation technologies for developing  countries; strategies to overcome barriers to technology needs  assessments; costs associated with needs assessments; the sustainable development component of needs assessments;  and the use of development criteria, such as job creation, in  selecting technologies.

One developed country speaker stressed the importance of using  genuine examples in technology transfer, noting that experience in  stakeholder meetings demonstrated how committed non-governmental  organizations could take a leading role in promoting  environmentally-sound technologies (ESTs).

## SESSION THREE: ELEMENTS OF NEEDS ASSESSMENTS

The session on elements of needs assessments convened on Tuesday  afternoon, 23 April. Delegates began by examining the  participatory process in assessing technology needs, considering  examples in designing such a process, and focusing on the role of  various actors, including government agencies and the private  sector. The session then addressed the designing of technology  needs assessments and selection of priority areas in terms of  relevant technologies. It concluded with presentations and  discussions on the integration of technology needs with current  development programmes.

### PRESENTATIONS ON THE PARTICIPATORY PROCESS IN ASSESSING TECHNOLOGY  NEEDS

Vute Wangwacharakul (Thailand) presented his country's  experiences in assessing its technology needs, including the  process of undertaking its assessment. Identifying some  conclusions drawn from their experiences, he argued that action  and needs assessment should occur in parallel, given that actions  in some sectors may be already apparent. He also highlighted the  importance of an effective enabling environment and the need for  strong support from Annex I Parties, especially on joint research  development.

Sebastian Gallehr, Managing Director of the European Business  Council for a Sustainable Energy Future ('e5'), discussed the role  of the private sector in technology needs assessments. He  identified the various elements that most investors require when  considering possible ventures, highlighting the need for a  comprehensive business plan, which should contain a financial  analysis that conforms to an international standard, and include  key indicators such as rate of return, net present value,  depreciation, and payback period. The business plan should also  include a sensitivity analysis. He highlighted the value of a  strong relationship between investors and their business partners  based on trust and proven reliability, and underlined that  investors generally prefer a diversified portfolio to reduce risk.

###     Discussion:

In the ensuing discussion, several participants  highlighted the value of clearly identifying key  stakeholders/actors. One participant underlined the lessons and  experience gained during the past decade through project- and  programme-level experiences, such as GEF-funded activities.

Participants also considered the need to provide a sense of  security for investors, with one speaker suggesting that  technology needs assessments would demonstrate investment  feasibility and sustainability. In response, Sebastian Gallehr  highlighted that every private investor wants to be assured that  there will be a return on his investment. He noted that you cannot  change the approach investors take, but said you can use it to  your advantage if you understand what influences the decisions  they make.

### PRESENTATIONS ON DESIGNING TECHNOLOGY NEEDS ASSESSMENTS AND  SELECTING PRIORITY AREAS

Peter Pembleton, Project Manager, UNIDO,  presented his experience on needs assessments and industry needs  in Africa. He identified several obstacles to technology needs  assessments, including stakeholders' different demands,  difficulties in prioritizing technology needs, and the frequent  absence of the appropriate technical backgrounds among  stakeholders. In obtaining a reliable prioritized list of  technology needs, he noted that while a multi-stakeholder dialogue  is preferable, it is time and resource consuming. To address the  challenges of technology transfer, he proposed the development of  national systems of support involving local technology centers,  experts and networks.

Ron Benioff, Acting Chair of CTI's Working Group on Technology  Assessment and Capacity Building, outlined his organization's work  in identifying specific actions that developing countries can take  in partnership with businesses and donors to advance  implementation of high priority adaptation and mitigation  technologies. He noted that successful technology transfer  programmes have included variations on the following five steps:establishment of collaborative partnerships between key  stakeholders with the common purpose of enhancing technology  transfer; implementation of technology needs assessments; design and implementation of technology transfer plans and  specific actions; evaluation and refinement of the actions and plans; and dissemination of technology information.

On technology needs assessments, he stressed that the difficult  stage begins after the technical priorities have been identified.  He highlighted the experience of the Philippines, which had  identified renewable energy for rural development as its highest  priority. This enabled stakeholders to develop a carefully- considered approach, and led the government to create an enabling  environment, including fast track policy reforms to streamline the  approval process and to provide tax incentives.

In his presentation, Steve Halls, Director, UNEP-International  Environmental Technology Center (IETC), spoke about the need for  clear and standardized access to information on ESTs, arguing that  inadequate information and tools to support decision-making  represent significant barriers to technology transfer. He  suggested that action is needed in the following areas:defining what ESTs are; developing criteria and guidelines on EST identification and  selection; elaborating environmental performance criteria and guidelines  for ESTs; setting-up regional networks for EST information and  knowledge sharing; and establishing an enabling financial environment to enhance the  adoption and use of ESTs.

###     Discussion:

In the subsequent discussion, several speakers  referred to the amount of relevant information available on the  Internet, drawing attention to discussions at the Technology  Information Workshop held in Beijing from 18-19 April. One Annex I  Party speaker endorsed the Internet as an effective tool, while  observing that it should supplement rather than replace direct  face-to-face interaction. A developing country participant  stressed the need to increase awareness about the extensive  information available on the Internet. Steve Halls outlined UNEP- IETC's work to establish filtering mechanisms and portals to  ensure that only quality information is provided.

In response to a developed country participant's question on  inter-agency cooperation and duplication of work, Peter Pembleton  and Steve Halls outlined various cooperative initiatives between  intergovernmental organizations, with Halls adding that one way to  further such collaboration is to use the Internet and Intranets.

Replying to a question on the commercial viability of some  technologies, Ron Benioff said that the needs assessment process  should screen technologies to include only those that are viable.  In response to a question on encouraging investment, he said CTI  has attempted to screen project ideas to focus on those that might  be attractive to investors, and then to identity which companies  might be most interested in which projects.

### DESIGNING ACTIONS: INTEGRATION OF IDENTIFIED TECHNOLOGY NEEDS WITH  CURRENT DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMMES:

Sung-Chui Shin, Senior Adviser,  Korea Institute of Energy Research, discussed the Republic of  Korea's integration of its identified technology needs within  current development programmes. He outlined the current energy  situation and policies in the Republic of Korea, discussed the  country's main implementing programmes and described its efforts  at international collaboration on research and development. He  argued that, unlike the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM),  technology transfer within the UNFCCC is 'intangible,' with no  credit or incentives provided, meaning that it is not realistic to  expect voluntary technology transfer. To address this problem, he  proposed that systematic or mandatory approaches be required to  facilitate technology transfer under the UNFCCC. He also suggested  the establishment or designation of 'EST Technology Transfer  Education Centers' as an effective method for capacity building.  Finally, he proposed that the Expert Group on Technology Transfer  recommend a COP decision urging Annex I Parties to submit a list  of 'public' ESTs and the terms and conditions governing their  transfer.

Glicerio Eduardo Torres, Consejo Ciencia y Tecnologia, Peru,  presented a country report on technology needs assessment for  Peru. He outlined various technological options, including the use  of natural gas, fuel cells as energy generators, micro-turbines,  small hydroelectric systems, biofuels, solar energy, oceanic  energy, geothermal energy, and specific technologies in the  transportation, agriculture and agroforestry sectors. He outlined  Peru's action plan, which includes:the establishment of a Consultant Group for Technology  Transfer; promotion of a regional or subregional Center for Technology  Transfer sited in Peru; more effective technology transfer from industrialized  countries; an improvement in financing programmes and projects; and the creation of a special financial support project to  strengthen internal capacities in research development,  innovation, and training.

Marius Taranu, Expert on Needs Assessment at Moldova's Ministry of  Ecology, Construction and Territorial Development, presented a  case study of his country's programme on technology needs  assessment and its integration with current national development  programmes. He explained that the needs assessment programme aims  to identify options for replacing inefficient energy technologies  used in the energy and agricultural processing industry and to  assess the economic viability of renewable energy resources. He  highlighted the importance of integrating the technology needs  identified with sustainable development strategies, and outlined  the country's process of implementing Agenda 21, observing that  sustainable development principles were adopted in his country in  1998.

Holger Liptow, Head of Project Climate Change, Deutsche  Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ), spoke on  technology needs in the energy sector. Explaining that his  organization aims to integrate technological issues into  development cooperation, he highlighted its work on promoting  renewable energies for rural energy supply, noting that some  technologies are economically competitive with the small diesel  pumps often used in developing countries. He indicated that GTZ's  most successful work has been in China, where efficiency  improvements through more effective energy management at 32 power  plants resulted in a reduction of 500,000 tons of CO2 emissions  annually. He stressed that the dissemination and marketing of ESTs  must be on a commercially-sound basis.

## UNDP SESSION ON THE NATIONAL COUNTRY STUDIES PROGRAMME

On Wednesday morning, 24 April, participants convened in Plenary  for a special UNDP session on technology transfer activities under  the National Country Studies Programme (NCSP). During this  session, delegates heard presentations from ten national experts  outlining their experiences, outcomes and difficulties in  undertaking technology needs assessments under NCSP 'top-up'  activities. Following a general discussion on the issues raised by  these experts, the session concluded with presentations on a  recent UNDP/NCSP survey and on a practical methodology to conduct  technology needs assessments.

### COUNTRY PRESENTATIONS

National experts: Armenia spoke on the  evolution of her country's climate change policy, which has now  reached the implementation stage. She stressed that climate change  technologies must meet local needs and be appropriate for local  circumstances, and noted that a group of experts is to disseminate  technical information on ESTs suitable for use in Armenia.

Burkina Faso identified its need for technologies such as low- emitting cooking and lighting equipment appropriate for domestic  use. He said his country has organized case studies by sector to  identify technologies for adaptation and mitigation needs.

Burundi indicated that his country had finished its first national  communication in November 2001. He noted that 60% of his country's  greenhouse gases are energy-sector related, and mainly from  biomass and kerosene. He said one of the energy efficient  technologies Burundi aims to employ is solar energy for lighting  and refrigeration purposes.

Georgia explained that its energy and industry sectors are the  main focus for greenhouse gas emissions reduction, mainly through  improving energy efficiency. She informed participants that  several proposals to reduce greenhouse gas emissions are being  discussed, including modernizing a cogeneration facility in  Tbilisi, improving the electricity transmission system, and  installing energy efficient street lighting.

Indonesia presented a report on the Identification of Less  Greenhouse Gases Emission Technologies in Indonesia, which was  financed by the GEF and supported by UNDP. The report concludes  that climate change will threaten Indonesia's long-term food  security. Several technology options are discussed in the report,  including switching from diesel oil to liquefied petroleum gas  (LPG) for buses and reducing methane emissions from rice fields.

Lebanon set out some specific actions his country is considering,  including promoting renewable energy, energy efficiency, and fuel  switching. He noted that, in one project, Lebanon achieved a 90%  reduction in methane emissions from a solid waste facility at a  cost of US$11.9/ton, and underscored that UNFCCC Article 4.5 urges  developed countries to strengthen the endogenous capacities of  non-Annex I Parties.

Niger described the difficult circumstances of his country,  including drought and the threat to food security. He noted that  climate change will only exacerbate this situation.

Sudan described some of the institutional barriers - including the  absence of a legal framework and lack of qualified technical  people -that affect technology needs assessment and the  formulation and implementation of effective adaptation and  mitigation strategies.

Togo described its technology transfer activities, highlighted the  benefits of learning from other countries' experiences, and urged  more assistance from CTI and other organizations to help  developing countries with their work.

Bhutan highlighted its vulnerability due to its mountainous  ecosystem, and identified lack of data and information on  appropriate technologies for its special circumstances as major  constraints.

###     Discussion:

Chair Thorgeirsson opened the general discussion on  country presentations, drawing attention to comments in the  presentations on adaptation and risk assessment, and a focus on  the need to use the most suitable rather than the newest or most  advanced technologies. One developed country participant  highlighted comments about 'not reinventing the wheel' and  building on previous experiences in developing methodologies.

A developing country speaker drew attention to the preponderance  of mitigation rather than adaptation technology efforts, stating  that the approach to adaptation was primarily one of vulnerability  assessment. In response, a speaker from an intergovernmental  organization stated that, while there had previously been a  greater emphasis on mitigation, actions had recently been taken to  address concerns about adaptation, including the development of  adaptation guidelines and a fund.

Replying to a question about the role of National Adaptation  Programmes of Action (NAPAs), Janos Pasztor, UNFCCC Secretariat,  explained that they are exclusively for the least developed  countries (LDCs), and are not a methodology for adaptation but  rather a method or framework to develop an action plan at a  national level. On the status of NAPAs, he said COP-7 had approved  the approach for NAPAs and the GEF had developed an operational  strategy for funding this work, which now has to be considered by  the GEF Council. He also highlighted the role of the LDC Expert  Group (LEC) in supporting NAPA development.

One developing country participant stressed the value of  traditional and indigenous knowledge on adaptation to the climate  and weather patterns, arguing that traditional as well as western  technological solutions need to be considered. Another non-Annex I  Party speaker highlighted the existence of some obvious adaptation  technologies in developed countries, such as early warning systems  and modeling and forecasting capacities, and said these presented  clear opportunities for technology transfer.

### SUMMARY OF UNDP/NCSP SURVEY

Yamil Bonduki, Technical Advisor,  National Communications Support Programme, UNDP-GEF, presented a  summary on a recent UNDP/NCSP survey. He noted that technology  transfer issues are only briefly referred to in countries'  national communications. His survey indicated that 55 countries  had been provided with additional 'top-up' support for their  technology needs assessments, and that an additional 30-40  countries may submit 'top-up' proposals. He observed that the  focus is generally on mitigation technologies and that an  assessment of technology needs for adaptation is a priority that  needs to be addressed. He concluded that lack of practical  guidance is the most important constraint for assessing technology  needs.

### A PRACTICAL METHODOLOGY TO CONDUCT TECHNOLOGY NEEDS ASSESSMENTS

Rob Gross, UNDP/NCSP Consultant, spoke about a project to develop  a practical methodology handbook for conducting technology needs  assessments. He emphasized that the project will build on existing  work, with the goal being to go beyond the level of explaining the  process of technology transfer and actually to develop useful  guidance on how resource and technology options, market and  institutional issues and policy priorities can work to the  advantage of specific countries. He stressed that some issues will  be generic while other topics will be country specific. Indicating  that the handbook will be a 'living document' that will evolve  over time and can be adapted to particular circumstances, he said  that a final draft should be available in September 2002.

###     Discussion:

In the ensuing discussion, a number of participants  asked for clarification on various details of the handbook, and  several speakers stressed that the handbook should complement  other relevant work, rather than duplicate it. Responding to  questions about the timing of the handbook, Rob Gross stressed  that technology needs assessment is not a 'once-and-for-all  process' and will have to be revisited periodically. Yamil Bonduki  added that, although some countries are too far along the current  process to use the handbook for their needs assessments, many  others are not, and will therefore be able to benefit from it. He  responded to one participant's concern that the handbook might  focus on mitigation by indicating that this was not the case,  adding that mitigation analysis experiences will be useful for  adaptation work.

One speaker called for an inventory of technologies, which she  said could provide recommendations based on the circumstances of  the type of country reviewing the technology options. A developed  country participant said technology needs assessments should not  just establish what technology to use for a specific project, but  could also contribute to the development of a wider national  technology policy.

## SESSION FOUR: TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER ACTIVITIES AND INITIATIVES

On Wednesday afternoon, delegates convened for a session on  technology transfer activities and initiatives. The session began  with four presentations on developed countries' technology  transfer activities in support of UNFCCC Article 4.5, focusing on  the assistance provided in acquiring mitigation and adaptation  technologies. Delegates then considered multilateral initiatives  and other technical assistance programmes by international  organizations.

### DEVELOPED COUNTRIES' ACTIVITIES ON TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER

Alexandra  Mallett, Policy Analyst, Natural Resources Canada, explained  Canada's approach to technology transfer and described some of the  opportunities that exist for countries to capitalize on existing  and future programmes. She emphasized that Canada aims to promote  climate technologies that reduce greenhouse gases and create  opportunities for domestic industry. Stressing the global nature  of the climate change problem, she said Canada is indifferent as  to where reductions in greenhouse gases are achieved. To  facilitate reductions overseas, she indicated that significant  resources have been made available through the CDM and JI Office,  and through the Canada Climate Change Development Fund. In  addition, Canada is launching the Canadian International  Technology Initiative. She concluded by highlighting Canada's  support for private sector involvement and host country-driven  technology needs assessment.

Vivi Yieng-Kow, Senior Advisor, Danish Environmental Protection  Agency, stated that Denmark's approach to technology transfer is  to integrate it within existing development assistance programmes  that focus on poverty reduction through sustainable development.  Such development assistance is usually bilateral, allocated for a  five-year period, and funneled through DANIDA - the Danish  international development agency. She highlighted some existing  initiatives, including programmes in Nepal, Ghana, Burkina Faso,  Mozambique and Egypt. On environmental aspects of the development  assistance programme in Nepal, she highlighted initiatives to  replace 15,000 wood stoves with low-emitting cooking stoves,  generate electricity from micro-hydro dams, and promote solar  energy in households. She stressed the difficulty of incorporating  long-term sustainable development factors into decision making.

Ko Barrett, Director of the Climate Change Programme at the US  Agency for International Development, briefed participants on US  technology transfer activities. She noted that President George W.  Bush's new climate change policy highlights technology transfer as  a key priority, and allocates US$4.5 billion for climate change  domestically and internationally. On needs assessments, she  concluded that methodologies risk being irrelevant if the right  entry point for technology transfer has not been identified and  key stakeholders have not been engaged. She also suggested that  both 'long and quick yield' measures are relevant to effective  technology transfer, development and innovation, and that proper  stakeholder buy-in is the key to sustainability.

Arthur Riedacker, Senior Advisor, Mission Interministerielle de  l'Effet de Serre, France, outlined his country's technology  transfer activities, programmes and plans. He drew attention to an  event taking place in November 2002 - the Pollutec Annual  Exhibition - which he described as the largest annual exhibition  in Europe of environmental equipment, technology and services for  industry and local authorities. The exhibition will coincide with  a Seminar on North-South Technology Cooperation for Sustainable  Development and Climate.

### MULTILATERAL INITIATIVES AND OTHER TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE  PROGRAMMES

Peter Pembleton, Project Manager, UNIDO, outlined  UNIDO's support for industry under the UNFCCC. He described  UNIDO's programme, which aims to mobilize national, subregional  and regional capacity and to develop mechanisms that support  industrial technology transfer. He described the three stages of  work - the preparation of background studies, provision of  preparatory assistance, and implementation of the programme. On  results achieved to date, he said UNIDO had started with six  African experts and now has over 200 individuals involved in its  Africa network, as well as activities in several ASEAN countries.  He said the approach taken has been characterized by a bottom-up,  multi-stakeholder, learning-by-doing approach involving public- private sector partnerships.

Nandita Mongia, GEF's Asia-Pacific Regional Manager and Technical  Advisor for Climate Change, highlighted the work of the GEF in  supporting technology transfer in a climate change context. She  noted that the GEF provides additional and incremental funding of  activities that directly contribute to greenhouse gas emissions  reductions. To date, the GEF has disbursed approximately US$1.5  billion through its Operation Programmes (OPs). While most  programmes must show an immediate environmental benefit, she said  money can also be disbursed to commercialize promising new energy  technologies that may result in a future environmental benefit.  She explained that while the GEF is not directly mandated to  support technology transfer, it does promote such activities by  supporting technology evaluation, training, policy review and  development, and the improvement of financial and business skills.  In addition, the GEF assists in removing barriers to the large- scale application, implementation, and dissemination of least- cost, commercially-established or newly-developed energy efficient  technologies. On lessons learned, she cited the need to  distinguish the larger body of relevant stakeholders from the key  national partner, and the fact that this key national partner  differs from country-to-country. She stressed that it is crucial  to engage the key stakeholder from the beginning of the project  cycle.

Elmer Holt, CTI Vice Chair, outlined the technical assistance for  needs assessments available from CTI, describing a range of  activities in various developing countries and countries with  economies in transition (EITs). He then described CTI's activities  under the Cooperative Technology Implementation Plan (CTIP)  programmes, which include financial, technical and facilitative  roles. Identifying some possible future roles for CTI in relation  to needs assessment, he suggested that it could:convene a workshop on training and/or sharing country  experiences; assist with donor matchmaking systems; extend technical support for technology needs assessments to  additional countries; further cooperate with UNDP on a handbook; and augment current efforts to track technology-related training  programmes and match these with country needs.

He concluded by observing that needs assessment it is not an end  in itself, but is one critical component in a process that should  also include building capacity, creating an enabling environment,  and developing a practical plan of implementation.

## SESSION FIVE: POSSIBLE POST-NEEDS ASSESSMENTS ACTIVITIES

On Wednesday afternoon, participants addressed the issue of  activities that could follow the needs assessment process. The  session began with presentations on case studies of technology  transfer projects and partnerships, which outlined follow-up  actions after the completion of needs assessments. This was  followed by presentations on the dissemination of technology needs  information through technology information systems, and on  technology transfer and Parties' national communications.

### CASE STUDIES OF TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER PROJECTS AND PARTNERSHIPS

Suk-Hoon Woo, Economic Advisor on Economic Policy Coordination in  the Office of the Prime Minister of the Republic of Korea,  examined technology transfer in a bilateral programme and lessons  learned in the Republic of Korea. Outlining its technology  transfer experiences over the past three years, he described the  various stages of this work, including the selection of focus  areas for technology transfer and activities undertaken in those  areas. In this regard, he reported on a bilateral technology  transfer initiative involving an energy service company (ESCO),  Hyundai Motors and a US partner. Summarizing lessons learned, he  said technology transfer must be considered in the context of  national strategies and reflect national circumstances, and  stressed that experience and history are important in determining  the success of technology transfer efforts, highlighting the  evolutionary nature of the process and the need to take into  account previous energy investments.

Kishan Kumarsingh, Technical Coordinator for Trinidad and Tobago's  Environmental Management Authority, presented several examples of  small island States' experiences with technology transfer. He  began by identifying some key issues for small island States,  including: the need for 'soft' technologies that can be used to  develop local climate models; the importance of an ongoing  assessment of vulnerability and adaptation options; and the  benefits of establishing a technology information network with a  focus on adaptation. He emphasized the need for capacity building  to address such issues, and highlighted positive experiences in  South-South cooperation. He highlighted several examples of  success stories in small island States, including the  electrification of rural areas using solar photovoltaic systems in  Pacific Island countries and the use of solar water heating  systems in Cyprus.

### DISSEMINATING TECHNOLOGY NEEDS INFORMATION THROUGH TECHNOLOGY  INFORMATION SYSTEMS

Florin Vladu, Programme Officer, Technology,  UNFCCC Secretariat, spoke about the dissemination of technology  needs information through 'TT:Clear,' a programme proposed by the  UNFCCC that aims to improve the flow of, and access to,  information related to the development and transfer of ESTs. He  explained that a prototype has been up-and-running since September  2001, and that 1650 projects are now in the UNFCCC's database,  with users being able to access information by using search  criteria. He also noted that TT:Clear would act as a gateway to  information from outside sources.

Li Junfeng, Deputy Director General, Energy Research Institute,  China, examined the role of the UNFCCC's Technology Website,  identifying who needs the website, what kind of information they  require, what can be achieved from the website, the role of the  website, and how it can be developed so that it meets visitors'  needs. He indicated that the primary users would be decision  makers, manufacturers, investors, and research and development  institutions, and said it would supply information on relevant  policies, technologies and investment opportunities, and would  seek to act as a bridge between those supplying and demanding  technologies.

### TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER AND NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS

George Manful,  Head of the Capacity Building/GEF Unit with the UNFCCC  Implementation Programme, spoke on technology transfer and  national communications. He indicated that 80 initial non-Annex I  national communications had been received as of 18 April 2002.  Commenting on the content of the initial communications, he said  technology transfer issues had been referred to only in a 'very  superficial' manner, and that these references related mainly to  mitigation rather than adaptation projects. Issues mentioned in  the communications, but not elaborated on in any detail, included  the cost of technologies, barriers to technology transfer,  institutional and technical capacities, and the availability of  information. He also drew attention to the work of the  Consultative Group of Experts on non-Annex I communications and to  the revised guidelines for preparing national communications  adopted at COP-7.

## WORKING GROUPS

On Thursday morning, 25 April, participants met in three parallel  working groups with the aim of developing recommendations on  methods and tools for assessing technology needs, as well as  recommendations on the types of assistance required to carry out  technology needs assessments. The three working groups, which each  had the same mandate and goals, were convened in order to provide  an informal, small-group setting designed to allow all  participants to provide input on the development of these  recommendations.

The working groups considered four questions designed to help  guide them in formulating their ideas and recommendations:Are the existing methodologies for needs assessments adequate  and, if not, how can they be improved? What are the potential barriers in technology needs  assessments and what specific actions can be taken to overcome  these barriers? What capacity building and technical assistance is needed to  undertake needs assessments? What possible follow-up activities can be pursued related to  needs assessments? The working groups were chaired by Anthony Olusegun Adegbulugbe  (Nigeria), William Kojo Agyemang-Bonsu (Ghana) and Javier Hanna  Figueroa (Bolivia). Each group also appointed a rapporteur to  report back to the Plenary with their findings.

### WORKING GROUP REPORTS

The working groups reported back to Plenary  with their conclusions and recommendations on Thursday afternoon.

###     Group I:

Group I Rapporteur Alexandra Mallett (Canada) reported  participants' recommendation that the use of methodologies should  be a country-driven process. Noting that a number of different  methodologies exist, she highlighted the group's view that each  has advantages and disadvantages that may make them useful in  different contexts.

On barriers and constraints, she noted statements relating to: the  need to identify the most appropriate and relevant technology  needs, rather than producing a 'wish list'; inadequate  information, including the absence of systems and tools, data and  information, and efficient networks; a lack of buy-in and  ownership of the process; inadequate human resources; and  insufficient institutional capacity. She highlighted participants'  comments on the need to integrate needs assessments within the  context of national development strategies and to coordinate this  integration into the national development planning cycle. She  noted linkages between capacity building and technical assistance,  and calls for training and increasing awareness of relevant tools  through multilateral agencies, as well as support for increased  access to essential tools such as computers, software, and the  Internet.

Outlining possible follow-up activities relating to technology  needs assessments, she drew attention to suggestions for:enhanced access to funding; hands-on training on methodologies; the compilation of user manuals; increased work on vulnerability and adaptation; the promotion of coordination among donors and agency  programmes; 'matchmaking' for desired technologies; linkages with business networks and export credit agencies; development of a roster of technical experts; a review of past experiences; development of an implementation plan; and accessing of funds for needs assessments and post-assessment  work.

###     Group II:

Rapporteur Imran Habib Ahmad (Pakistan) said the group's  discussion on methodologies had highlighted the view that 'one  size does not fit all,' that technology needs assessments should  be a country-driven process, and that UNFCCC Article 4.5 must be  the key driver. On the adequacy of methodologies and tools, he  said participants had stressed that they do provide a useful  framework, while not providing a total solution, given the  country-driven nature of the process.

He reported that the group had identified five major barriers in  technology needs assessments:the over-proliferation of methodologies; inadequate human capacity; lack of 'meaningful' information; financial constraints; and institutional problems.

He then outlined the group's suggested actions to overcome these  barriers. On actions on methodologies, he said participants had  endorsed the 'added value' they brought, while making it clear  that they supported the elaboration of a simple description of  steps outlining the critical elements for needs assessments.  Regarding the lack of human capacity, he said participants had  stressed the need to better use countries' existing capacity,  ensuring that people are correctly placed and trained, with use of  regional and international resources if problems persist.

On actions to address the lack of meaningful information, Imran  Habib Ahmad said the group had proposed improved access to  information, including through the Internet, and the holding of  relevant workshops and meetings. Regarding financial resource  constraints, he highlighted participants' comments supporting the  effective utilization of existing resources/funding sources, and  stressing the need to ensure that commitments under the UNFCCC are  met. On actions to address institutional constraints, he noted  comments supporting the creation of a favorable enabling  environment.

He concluded by highlighting statements on the use of 'common  sense' in deciding how to proceed and determining what steps to  take, the need for further work on adaptation, and the fact that  needs assessments are simply the starting point towards real  technology transfer, not an end in themselves.

###     Group III:

Rapporteur Nabil Mina (Lebanon) reported that the group  had identified various barriers and constraints, including:  limited resources for countries to undertake comprehensive work;  lack of data, information, and tools for analysis; and inadequate  in-country capacity. Possible means to overcome these barriers  identified by participants included more research and development,  increased public awareness, and the establishment of institutions  to utilize resources more efficiently. On capacity building, he  said participants had highlighted the need to develop endogenous  capacities, the importance of capacity building for adaptation,  and the value of permanent cooperative research programmes. On  follow-up activities, his working group had suggested: broader  dissemination of information on technical needs assessment and  training on their use; the establishment of a fund for  coordination and training; and the efficient use of the funds that  are already available.

###     Discussion:

In the ensuing discussion on the working group  reports, one participant emphasized that, while the methodologies  were not yet well known, those who had undertaken needs  assessments without such methodologies had intuitively taken a  similar approach. Another participant suggested that the term  'technology needs assessment' had been demystified by this  meeting.

## CLOSING REMARKS

Participants heard closing statements on Thursday afternoon. Jong  Whan Noh, Chief Project Officer, KEMCO, thanked participants for  their attendance and said he looked forward to cooperating with  members of the Expert Group on Technology Transfer in the future.

Janos Pasztor, UNFCCC Secretariat, conveyed Chair Thorgeirsson's  congratulations on such a constructive gathering, and his regrets  that he could not attend the closing Plenary. He noted that SBSTA- 16 will address needs assessment and consider the ideas and  recommendations raised by participants, and expressed his  gratitude to the meeting presenters, participants, KEMCO and the  local staff, and the Earth Negotiations Bulletin for reporting on  this meeting.

Wanna Tanunchaiwatana, UNFCCC Secretariat, expressed her pleasure  at the outcome of the meeting, which she said was very positively  influenced by the high-quality and expertise of the participants.

William Kojo Agyemang-Bonsu (Ghana), who chaired the closing  Plenary, thanked the UNFCCC Secretariat for its 'wonderful'  efforts in preparing for this meeting. Observing that 'we have  started a process' that would be continued at SBSTA-16, he thanked  participants and closed the meeting at 2:15 pm.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR

### UPCOMING CLIMATE CHANGE WORKSHOPS

A number of climate change  workshops will be held prior to the 16th session of the UNFCCC  subsidiary bodies. These include the following:Workshop on cleaner or less greenhouse gas-emitting energy,  Whistler, Canada, 7 - 8 May 2002; Workshop on the status of modeling activities to assess the  adverse effects of climate change and impacts of response  measures, Bonn, Germany, 16 - 18 May 2002; Pre-sessional consultations on registries, Bonn, Germany, 2 -  3 June 2002; and Pre-sessional workshop on the draft revised uniform reporting  format for activities implemented jointly, Bonn, Germany, 2 - 3  June 2002.

For more information, contact: UNFCCC Secretariat; tel: +49-228- 815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.int;  Internet: http://www.unfccc.int

### CONFERENCE ON EU AND GERMAN CLIMATE POLICY - CHALLENGES BEFORE THE  ENTRY INTO FORCE OF THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

This meeting will be held  from 6-8 May 2002, in Hamburg, Germany. Organized by the Hamburg  Institute of International Economics, the conference will focus on  the ratification of the Kyoto Protocol in the EU, challenges with  regard to EU national climate strategies, internal EU emissions  trading, integration of EU accession countries, the role of the  Kyoto mechanisms, and EU strategies for achieving entry into  force. For more information, contact: Axel Michaelowa, Hamburg  Institute of International Economics; tel: +49-404-283-4309; fax:  +49-404-283-4451; e-mail: michaelowa@hwwa.de; Internet:  http://www.hwwa.de/climate.htm

### CONFERENCE AND WORKSHOP ON CLIMATE VARIABILITY AND CHANGE AND  THEIR HEALTH EFFECTS IN THE CARIBBEAN

This conference will take  place from 21-25 May 2002, in Bridgetown, Barbados. The conference  is being sponsored by the Pan-American Health Organization and the  WHO under the auspices of the Interagency Network on Climate and  Human Health. Participants will consider climate variability and  climate change, linkages between climate and human health, and  public health policies and strategies for adaptation to climate  variability and change. For more information, contact the Pan- American Health Organization, tel: +1-246-426-3860; fax: +1-246-  436-9779; e-mail: cpcadmin@cpc.paho.org; Internet:  http://www.cpc.paho.org

### FOURTH SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE WSSD

PrepCom  IV will take place from 24 May - 7 June 2002, in Bali, Indonesia.  PrepCom IV will include Multi-Stakeholder Dialogues and a  Ministerial Segment, and is expected to complete the document on  review of Agenda 21, with recommendations for further action, and  develop a concise political document, to be submitted to the WSSD.  For more information, contact: Andrey Vasilyev, DESA; tel: +1-212- 963-5949; fax: +1-212-963-4260; e-mail: vasilyev@un.org; Major  groups contact: Zehra Aydin-Sipos, DESA; tel: +1-212-963-8811;  fax: +1-212-963-1267; e-mail: aydin@un.org; Internet:  http://www.johannesburgsummit.org/

### 16TH SESSION OF THE UNFCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES

SB-16 will take  place in Bonn, Germany, from 5-14 June 2002. For more information,  contact: UNFCCC Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815-1000; fax: +49-228- 815-1999; e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.int; Internet:  http://www.unfccc.int

### WORLD SUMMIT ON SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

The World Summit on  Sustainable Development will take place from 26 August - 4  September 2002, in Johannesburg, South Africa. For more  information, contact: Andrey Vasilyev and Zehra Aydin-Sipos, DESA  (see above).

### EIGHTH CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE UNFCCC

COP-8 is scheduled  to take place from 23 October - 1 November 2002, in New Delhi,  India. For more information, contact the UNFCCC Secretariat (see  above).

### 'POLLUTEC' ANNUAL EXHIBITION AND TECHNOLOGY SEMINAR

The Pollutec  Annual Exhibition will take place from 25-29 November 2002 in  Lyon, France. The largest annual exhibition in Europe for  environmental equipment, technology and services for industry and  local authorities, this event is expected to attract 60,000  visitors and 2000 exhibitors from 33 countries. The exhibition  will coincide with a Seminar on North-South Technology Cooperation  for Sustainable Development and Climate. For more information,  contact: e-mail: a.reidacker@mies.pm.gouv.fr; Internet:  http://www.pollutec.com