---
title: "REPORT OF THE THIRD SESSION OF THE AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE: 5-8 MARCH 1996"
id: 1227000e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/1227000e
date: 1996-03-08
abstract: "The third session of the Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate  (AGBM 3) was held in Geneva from 5-8 March 1996. Delegates  heard a number of new, specific proposals on new commitments  for Annex I Parties, including a two-phase C02 emissions  reduction target proposed by Germany. They also discussed how  Annex I countries might distribute or share new commitments,  and whether those should take the form of an amendment or  protocol. Developing countries raised questions on whether  policies and measures under discussion would represent  barriers to trade. Delegates agreed to compile proposals for  new commitments for consideration at the next session of the  AGBM, and to hold informal roundtable discussions on policies  and measures as well as on quantitative emissions limitation  and reduction objectives."
---

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE AGBM

The first Conference of the Parties (COP-1) to the Framework  Convention on Climate Change, held in Berlin from 28 March to  7 April 1995, established an open-ended Ad Hoc Group on the  Berlin Mandate through its decision  FCCC/CP/1995/7/Add.1/Decision 1/CP.1, also referred to as the  'Berlin Mandate.' The priority aim of the Berlin Mandate (BM)  is the strengthening of commitments in Article 4.2 (a) and (b)  of the Convention for Annex I Parties, both to  elaborate policies and measures, and to set quantified  limitation and reduction objectives within specified  timeframes such as 2005, 2010 and 2020 for anthropogenic  emissions by sources and removals by sinks of greenhouse gases  (GHGs) not controlled by the Montreal Protocol. The BM states  that the process will not introduce any new commitments for  non-Annex I Parties.

## FIRST SESSION

At its first session (AGBM 1), which took place from 21-25  August 1995, the AGBM considered several issues, including an  analysis and assessment to identify possible policies and  measures for Annex I Parties and requests for inputs to  subsequent sessions. Delegates debated the nature, content and  duration of the analysis and assessment and its relationship  to other aspects of the process. Several developed and  developing countries stressed that analysis and assessment  should be conducted in parallel and not prior to negotiations,  but a few developing countries held that more time was needed,  particularly to evaluate economic costs. Regarding inputs to  subsequent sessions, Parties differed widely on the number of  requested inputs, with some developed countries emphasizing  the need to avoid delay, while others sought a more  comprehensive approach to increase the AGBM's options. Many  developing countries requested minimal inputs, stating that a  wealth of information already existed, while a few, mainly oil  producing countries emphasized the need for further study on  economic impacts. AGBM 1 adopted an agenda of work for its  second session, but failed to elect its Bureau.

## SECOND SESSION

The second session of the AGBM was held in Geneva from 30  October - 3 November 1995. Debate over the extent of analysis  and assessment continued, but delegates also heard new ideas  for the structure and form of a possible protocol. During the  week-long meeting, delegates considered: strengthening of  commitments in Article 4.2 (a) and (b), regarding policies and  measures, as well as quantified emissions limitation and  reduction objectives within specified timeframes; advancing  the implementation Article 4.1; and possible features of a  protocol or other legal instrument.

During the meeting, Spain, on behalf of the European Union,  submitted an outline for a protocol or legal instrument. The  outline did not include proposals on policies, measures,  objectives or timeframes, but was organized on three  principles: consistency with prior AGBM discussions; creating  a dynamic instrument that can develop over time; and linking  measures to existing Convention provisions where they apply.  The outline includes six articles: commitments by developed  and other Annex I Parties, including a section on voluntary  application by non-Annex I Parties; commitments by all  Parties; review of commitments; cross-references to FCCC  articles; amendment procedures, including simplified  procedures for annexes; and final clauses. It would include  three annexes of policies and measures: those applicable to  all Annex I Parties; those agreed as high priority in national  programmes; and those to be considered in national programmes,  as appropriate. While delegates did not decide to adopt this  outline, they did agree that it merits further consideration.

# AGBM 3 REPORT

AGBM Chair Raúl Estrada Oyuela (Argentina) opened the session,  noting that delegates should be prepared to complete the  analysis and evaluation required of the Berlin Mandate. In  view of the fact that 154 States have submitted ratifications,  it is becoming increasingly clear that the international  community is becoming more committed to the Framework  Convention on Climate Change (FCCC). But, he said, progress  depends not only on the number of delegations that can attend  but also on the need to understand what can occur and what  needs to be done. He recalled conclusions from the IPCC Second  Assessment Report (SAR) that action by man is indeed  influencing the climate system. There is a need to show  awareness of this and to make progress in adopting  precautionary measures that will help to tackle problems in an  effective way.

The Chair said that from the beginning the AGBM has had a  group of delegations that has tried to slow the progress of  work. He expressed his intention to overcome that obstacle and  move forward. He urged all delegations to reflect on this  point and to contribute effectively to achievement of the BM.  He promised to do everything in his power to avoid getting  'our feet caught in a net of procedural matters or small  questions' leading to infinite studies that would delay the  AGBM's work.

Executive Secretary Michael Zammit-Cutajar said the session  has the advantage of starting with substantial inputs from  informal workshops and debate in the Subsidiary Body for  Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) on the IPCC SAR  which, while not conclusive, is reflected in the SBSTA report.  He said he was struck by the IPCC Chair's observation that in  certain scenarios, future per capita emissions should not  exceed per capita emissions today to permit stabilization at  double pre-industrial atmospheric concentration of C02.  Combined with the statement that developing countries need to  increase their energy consumption to achieve sustainable  development, he drew two conclusions: there is a need to focus  on development and deployment of sustainable energy supplies  to further de-link energy for sustainable growth; and while  switching to sustainable energy, developed countries should  actively promote sustainable consumption patterns and energy  efficient technologies, limiting their per capita fuel use to  create space in which developing countries can increase their  consumption. Quantitative emission limitation and reduction  objectives (QELROs) may be viewed not only as a step to  limiting global emissions but also toward redistributing  emissions to where they are most needed. It is not a  suggestion for dumping old technologies but a reminder that  redistribution of resources is necessary to achieve  sustainable development.

The Secretariat is ready to prepare additional documents,  but  he urged delegates to evaluate the utility of any major new  document they may request. One main question for this session  is whether the AGBM sees merit in the institutional strategy  of using existing Convention processes and bodies, such as the  Secretariat, or prefers to establish new ones. For financial  as well as institutional reasons, he suggested there is merit  in the institutional economy of seeking a 'non-proliferation  protocol.' Delegates then adopted the agenda (FCCC/AGBM/1996/1) and  annotations to the agenda (FCCC/AGBM/1996/1/Add.1). Four new  NGOs were accredited to participate in the AGBM, and the Chair  noted that as in previous meetings NGOs would be welcome on  the floor before meetings only.

The Chair said the Bureau had adjusted the schedule for future  AGBM meetings: AGBM 4 will meet during COP-2; AGBM 5 will meet  9-13 December 1996 in Geneva; AGBM 6 from 3-7 March 1997 in  Bonn; and AGBM 7 during the summer of 1997, prior to COP-3 at  a location to be determined.

## ELECTION OF OFFICERS OTHER THAN THE CHAIR

The Chair summarized negotiations on election of AGBM officers  other than Chair, which had not been conclusive. Four regional  groups had agreed to a Bureau format including a Chair, two  Vice-Chairs, and the two subsidiary body Chairs as ex-officio  members. Appointing advisers to the Bureau is still under  discussion. The Western European and Others Group (WEOG) and  the Asian Group are to appoint Vice-Chairs. WEOG nominated Dan  Reifsnyder (US), Asia nominated Thailand, and both nominations  were accepted. The Chair also invited Maciej Sadowski  (Poland), China, Jorge Berguño (Chile), Bert Metz  (Netherlands), Bakary Kante (Senegal), and Evans King  (Trinidad and Tobago) to be interim advisers. CHINA said the  Asian Group had selected Thailand and Saudi Arabia to provide  its representatives, so he could not accept the invitation.  Mohamed Salem Sorour Al Sabban (Saudi Arabia) was selected as  an adviser.

Japan reminded delegates that it has expressed interest in  hosting the third or subsequent COP.

STRENGTHENING OF COMMITMENTS IN ARTICLE 4.2 (a) AND (b) Delegates discussed strengthening the commitments of Annex I  Parties. On Tuesday, 5 March, they heard a report from  subsidiary bodies. Quantified emissions reduction objectives  (QUELROs) were considered Wednesday, 6 March. Delegates  discussed policies and measures on Wednesday and Thursday, 6-7  March.

### INPUTS FROM SUBSIDIARY BODIES

The Chair recalled the AGBM's  request for specialized inputs from subsidiary bodies related  to relevant portions of the IPCC Second Assessment Report  (SAR), national communications of Annex I Parties, in-depth  reviews, and the SBSTA report on technologies. He said the  AGBM would seek guidance from the SAR on strengthening  commitments.

SBSTA Chair Tibor Farago said it was complicated to reach  consensus on the IPCC SAR but that it was time to arrive at  some basic conclusions. The SBSTA decided to: note that it  held only an initial exchange of views; commend the entire SAR  to all FCCC bodies; invite Parties to submit views for a full  consideration of the SAR at SBSTA-3; consider the SAR an  important science-based, comprehensive analysis; recommend  that the IPCC provide further inputs; and agree that findings  and projections should be made available to different  audiences with special attention to the national and regional  levels. The SBSTA proceedings indicate that some delegations  said that the findings of the SAR should be communicated to  all FCCC bodies, especially the AGBM, and that the findings  underlined the necessity of urgent action. The SBSTA Chair  highlighted two elements: that atmospheric concentrations are  increasing largely because of human activities and that the  balance of evidence suggests a discernible human influence on  the global climate system. Other delegations expressed the  view that it is premature for the SBSTA to highlight specific  SAR findings. These delegations said the list of items was  highly selective, reflecting a limited and biased view because  other IPCC findings should be equally important, including  that many uncertainties and factors limit the ability to  detect and project future climate change. On cooperation with  the IPCC, the SBSTA noted the conclusions of the IPCC meeting  in Rome in December and those of the SBSTA/IPCC joint working  group, and it requested a list of subjects for further IPCC  reports and workshops.

On national communications, six in-depth reviews of Annex I  Parties communications are available. These identify  successful approaches to meeting commitments as well as  difficulties. While the compilation and synthesis is not  finished, basic information indicates that most Parties will  not be able to stabilize GHGs at 1990 level by 2000. Regarding  non-Annex I Parties communications, the SBSTA considered a G-77/China document as the basis for adoption of guidelines and  a format.

Under technological inventory and assessment, the SBSTA  considered the Secretariat document (FCCC/SBSTA/1996/4 and  FCCC/SBSTA/1996/4/Add.1) and noted information available in  other fora. The Secretariat was asked to plan for technology  information centres, survey Parties' information needs, set up  a catalogue of adaptation technologies, and draft a paper on  terms of technology transfer.

The Chair of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI),  Mahmoud Ould El Gaouth (Mauritania), reported on the  conclusions of the SBI meeting. He said the SBI unanimously  adopted a conclusion on Annex I national communications, which  gives projected emissions to the year 2000 and is unambiguous  that current activities will not reduce GHG emissions unless  additional measures are taken by those Parties. A decision on  non-Annex I communications is still pending.

IPCC Chair Bert Bolin then reviewed the conclusions of the  SAR. He said the IPCC's aim is to make objective statements  and point out uncertainties, but also to emphasize robust  findings. He said the most important finding is that the  balance of evidence suggests discernible human influence on  climate. The .5  increase of global mean surface air  temperature in the last century is not by itself sufficient to  draw conclusions because of natural variability. But there is  evidence that: increasing C02 in the atmosphere will lead to  increasing temperature in the lower atmosphere and cooling in  the stratosphere; the greater warming in the southern than the  northern hemisphere in the past 50 years shows the shielding  effect of aerosols; and spatial patterns of climate change in  the northern hemisphere are similar to model predictions with  the only possible explanation being human influence on global  climate. Natural variability does not negate this conclusion  about human influence, but makes it difficult to isolate a  figure of sensitivity in the 1.5-4.5  increase above pre- industrial temperatures predicted by 2100. Considerable  uncertainty remains, but uncertainty does not eliminate risk.  He also emphasized that no regrets measures are available in  most countries, and that the precautionary principle provides  a rationale for action beyond no regrets. The challenge is to  select a prudent strategy of adaptation, mitigation and  research for adjustments over time. The SAR does not recommend  specific measures, but many options are identified that can  achieve 10-30% emissions reductions at little or no cost.

SAUDI ARABIA said the IPCC is an objective scientific body  that does not engage in policy and never will in the future.  He said it is difficult to indicate the amount of human  influence because of remaining uncertainties, including the  magnitude and pattern of long-term natural variability. The  IPCC should provide a view of whether existing proposals,  including the AOSIS draft protocol, will really avert climate  change and whether an effort with real economic costs will  have real environmental benefits.

Bolin said that the stabilization exercises show that a major  change of emissions must take place over the next century.  Ultimately there will be a need for deep cuts that require  effort of all countries. NIGERIA recalled that Bolin had said,  during SBSTA, that there were uncertainties inherent in the  SAR. The models need to be evaluated, the risk analysis has  not been properly pursued and the proposed policies and  measures (P&M) must be examined.

SAMOA, on behalf of AOSIS, said the first set of conclusions  highlighted in the SBSTA report best capture the weight of the  science and the urgency for action. He said a dangerous  interference has already occurred and the implications for  small islands are extremely serious. The AGBM must negotiate  emissions reductions and their timetable for implementation  and make progress toward establishing a protocol or other  legal instrument. CANADA supported the findings in the first  set of SBSTA conclusions and noted that they seemed to have  the support of most Parties. JAPAN supported the SAR findings  and said specific P&M should be clarified. He focused on  national communications and emphasized the need for more  systematic and comparable in-depth reviews. The EU commended  the IPCC report and highlighted several specific findings. He  said the risk of aggregate damage warranted action beyond no  regrets measures and that the policies proposed in the report  can serve as a basis for future action. SAUDI ARABIA recalled  that two sets of opinions were included in the SBSTA report on  key findings.

### POLICIES AND MEASURES

Chow Kok Kee (Malaysia) summarized an  informal workshop on policies and measures (P&M) held on 4-5  March 1996. He noted a presentation by IPCC Chair Bolin that  stressed there is no optimum set of measures but each country  needs to develop those best suited to its situation. Many  feasible measures have not been instituted, so there is a need  to bridge the gap between feasibility and decision making. The  workshop considered measures in renewable energy, transport,  industry, including voluntary agreements, sustainable  agriculture and economic instruments. The need for reduced  dependence on material consumption, decoupling energy and  growth, and de-carbonization - the use of non-fossil fuels and  nuclear energy - were highlighted, as were national  experiences. Lessons included: the need for a package of  measures combining market-based and government action;  measures must be tailored to national circumstances, but  energy and transport sectors are vital; and much can be done  with little cost, but the focus needs be on policy to overcome  barriers. A lack of a socioeconomic analysis of non-Annex I  Parties was a problem. He suggested that the AGBM consider  holding another workshop for further exchange of views.

The Secretariat introduced the document on policies and  measures (FCCC/AGBM/1996/2), explaining that it was compiled  from Annex I national communications and in-depth reviews, as  well as the SAR and Parties' submissions. The compilation: is  structured by sectoral classifications, based on IPCC  methodologies; considers the relative contribution of each  sector to proportional emissions; and gives an overview of  Annex I Party responses. The Secretariat tried to estimate the  potential for emission reductions in each sector using IPCC  information, and then identify areas for further analysis and  assessment by the AGBM in line with the AGBM 2 objective to  narrow the range of policies and measures.

CANADA reported on the Annex I experts group project on P&M  for common action, which is developing a methodology for  evaluating their effectiveness. The group's report (FCCC/AGBM/  1995/MISC.1) has a framework for common action and analysis,  which includes: policies and objectives; assessment  approaches; a description of actions; the rationale for common  actions and ways to implement them; the potential to reduce  emissions or improve sinks; economic costs and benefits;  political feasibility; barriers and how to address them; time  required for implementation and for achieving expected GHG  reductions; and the impacts, including social and  environmental ones, on countries including non-Annex I  Parties. The project does not suggest Parties' preferences for  measures in a protocol, and recognizes that there are a range  of definitions for common action. The first tranche of the  project covers sustainable transport; energy market reform;  economic and fiscal instruments; demand side efficiency;  sustainable agriculture and forestry; and energy efficiency  finance for economies in transition. An analysis will be ready  for COP-3.

The Chair noted that to produce a result for COP-3, delegates  need to narrow down P&M. A final document should have  flexibility to enlarge or reduce possible annexes to a  protocol, but to include some identified P&M in a protocol  would not exclude others.

SAUDI ARABIA said delegates should consider all GHGs, not only  C02. The Secretariat's document's sectoral analysis overlooks  some sectors, such as measures to reduce deforestation under  land-use change and forestry. Extensive analysis of removing  market distortions could provide good starting points. ITALY,  on behalf of the EU, said the EU has begun investigating 11  areas of P&M, identifying indicators, evaluating targets, and  assessing emission reductions toward a study for AGBM 4.  Papers will be produced on renewable energy and energy  efficiency, labeling, transport, and economic instruments.  Priorities include: energy policies; industrial measures,  including voluntary agreements; agriculture; forests; waste  management; HFCs and CFCs; and actions in the local  environment. The US said the flexibility of a full range of  policy options should be retained because narrowing could 'run  roughshod' over differences in national circumstances.  Criteria to select P&M could be: actions with great  commonality; those with broad support; areas where only a few  Parties are acting but with significant potential; and cost- effectiveness. Noting examples in refrigerators, power outlets  and fuel taxes, he said harmonized standards may push a lowest  common denominator and discourage innovation. It is desirable  to look for common actions, but those would not necessarily  promote national flexibility or environmental effectiveness.

CHILE supported Germany's proposed approach for a flat rate  emissions reduction, noting it contained clear measures and  was aimed at C02 emissions without precluding other  instruments. He suggested adding emphasis to hydroelectric and  nuclear energy, energy marketing, and industrial processes.  AUSTRALIA said P&M in a legal instrument should complement  national programmes. Economic and social analysis cannot  follow the narrowing process. An evaluation methodology should  be defined before culling out measures. A sectoral selection  process should not focus only on C02. A comprehensive approach  demonstrated in the workshop showed that differences between  Annex I Parties need to be taken into account. GDP welfare  costs should be covered in the analysis.

CANADA said the IPCC SAR suggests that significant  opportunities are available for Parties to take actions, so it  is important to identify P&M that reinforce the positive  relationship between economics and the environment, such as  energy efficiency and pollution controls. He highlighted areas  for action: energy; heavy industry; residential buildings;  transportation; non-combustion industries; agriculture;  forestry; waste management and sewage treatment; and cross- sectoral economic instruments. Guidelines on P&M could help in  narrowing options, but the narrowing should not exclude  sectors or GHGs and should include sinks. P&M should: benefit  from international coordination; have potential for emission  reductions; produce multiple dividends consistent with other  policies; make positive socioeconomic contributions; be  flexible, practical and innovative, permitting implementation  in different national circumstances; be transparent and  comprehensive; facilitate abatement technology development and  diffusion; and facilitate wide participation in mitigation.

SWITZERLAND said fluorocarbons and HFCs should be included as  a sector, as a possible growing source of emissions that are  persistent in atmosphere compared to other gases. NEW ZEALAND  suggested criteria to focus on: specific policies; cost  effectiveness and efficacy; producing significant abatement at  least cost; durability with flexibility to adapt to new  information on the timing and magnitude of climate change;  transparency in environmental and economic effects; and  effectiveness across national circumstances. Cross-sectoral  measures, including taxes, should be covered, and subsidy  reductions and market reforms are promising economic  instruments.

The NETHERLANDS said there are reasons for harmonizing P&M  because some measures cannot be taken at the national level  without distorting the global market. Also global trade rules  limit what individual nations can do, requiring international  coordination to overcome the limitations. As examples, energy  efficiency could be addressed, and international action would  be required for agreement between automobile producers to  encourage more fuel efficient cars. IRAN said the AGBM should  cooperate with the World Trade Organization (WTO), the  International Energy Agency (IEA), OPEC, UNIDO and others to  assess which P&M are effective and efficient. Some measures  could transfer capital from developing to developed countries  and would adversely affect terms of trade. ICELAND said  differentiated commitments can imply a more complicated  agreement, but reduction targets are possible in a more cost- effective manner if different national circumstances are  recognized. He cited Iceland's situation: nearly 100% of its  energy is renewable, but two-thirds of emissions come from  transport, which will not be a priority in an agreement.

SRI LANKA said a protocol like AOSIS's can be adopted. There  is a need for urgency even if Northern countries are not  obviously affected. Everyone stands to lose if no action is  taken. UGANDA said Annex I countries must take seriously their  commitment to transfer technology and financial resources to  developing countries. The EU proposals contain concrete and  useful measures. Clear P&M in technology and technical know- how can play an important role.

The REPUBLIC of KOREA said cross-sectoral economic instruments  and energy efficiency measures based on high technology have  significant trade impacts. He expressed concern about market  and labeling measures. If measures have negative impacts on  some countries, coordination is necessary to make the measures  most effective and put them in conformity with international  agreements. P&M should be designed and selected to avoid  negative impacts on non-Annex I countries' market access and  should not be disguised discriminatory trade measures.

MALAYSIA said it is hard to see the need for differentiation  between countries. Differentiation should not be an excuse not  to advance policies. The AGBM should prioritize P&M based on  aggregate effectiveness within and between sectors. P&M should  not lead to 'emissions leakage,' the transfer of polluting  industry to developing countries. Harmonizing cross-sectoral  economic instruments should not be discouraged. P&M could lead  to trade barriers, so impacts must be considered.

JAPAN said work on C02 emissions will be required as the  ultimate solution. Existing technology will not be sufficient,  so research and development on innovative technologies should  begin now. The US agreed with the Netherlands that markets can  benefit from coordination of standards, but harmonization can  be over-emphasized. It often tends toward a lowest common  denominator and can dampen innovation. Delegates need to ask  whether harmonization and coordination of measures is the best  use of available time.

KUWAIT said several delegations had referred to the SAR and  selective portions and attempted to related them to QELROs. As  in the SBSTA, some statements were highly selective, reflected  a limited and biased view of what was important and were taken  out of context. The SAR does not provide adequate guidance on  timetables or targets and an informed decision will require  much more information. He said there is a request for  technical papers that examine economic impacts and noted that  no interventions had squared their suggestions with the social  and economic impacts. He said he was puzzled over the Annex I  countries' interpretations of words such as 'equity' and  'differentiated' approach.

The MARSHALL ISLANDS stressed the need for urgent action and  said the socioeconomic effects of actions should be considered  against the baseline of no action at all. He said the premise  that P&M will have an immediate and adverse effect is entirely  false. He noted it has taken a year to get to this stage in  the AGBM process, largely due to the 'anthropogenic  interference' of some delegations who are intent on  undermining this process. He said a lengthy debate on  socioeconomic concerns will lead to delays.

INDIA echoed the Republic of Korea's apprehensions on the  implications of P&M on trade. The P&M that must be integrated  into Annex I Parties' policies must be examined very carefully  and may require accompanying measures to prevent adverse  impacts on developing countries. Any versions of prior  informed consent and labeling must not become disguised trade  barriers. KENYA stressed availability cost and the potential  for strengthening renewable technology. He said tropical  countries would be good markets for solar power, but the  technology must be affordable. Public education should grow  along with these measures, particularly where new products are  marketed. ARGENTINA said that subsidies for agriculture that  affect GHGs must be reduced. He noted that many interventions  referred to P&M that have an impact on trade and said the  current debate in the WTO suggests there are many measures  that could affect trade. He agreed with India and the Republic  of Korea on the need to know the economic implications of P&M  adopted by Annex I Parties. While they should be applied,  equality and equity should not be undermined. He called for  flexibility and disagreed with narrowing the list of P&M.  EGYPT said that QELROs are the real yardstick for measuring  the Convention's success. She placed high priority on P&M  regarding renewable energy sources, but said the possible  adverse effects of trade measures must be examined. MOROCCO  said that measures must respect country sovereignty and  account for the impact on developing countries. He said he  cannot accept proposals on labeling because they are a way of  avoiding international trade rules. He recalled a UNIDO eco- labeling decision that calls for cooperation and taking  developing countries into account.

### QUANTIFIED EMISSION LIMITATION REDUCTION OBJECTIVES WITHIN  SPECIFIC TIMEFRAMES

The Secretariat presented a report by Dr.  Pascale Morand Francis (Switzerland) on an informal workshop  on QELROs held 28 February 1996. The workshop was organized by  the Secretariat to help the AGBM accomplish its task of  setting quantified objective within specific timeframes.  Experts from five Parties, two IGOs and three other  organizations made presentations. IPCC Chair Bert Bolin  presented the Panel's most recent findings relevant to QELROs.  Participants also discussed the definition of 'dangerous,' as  referred to in Article 2 of the Convention. Bolin said that  the Parties should decide for themselves, while others said  the IPCC could develop criteria or indicators to help set a  threshold. The workshop also heard a number of technical  presentations on modeling, the design of cost-effective  mitigation strategies, the cost of emission reductions, and  near-term strategies for long-term climate protection.

Economic models were seen as tools to help understand the way  forward, although they do not adequately reflect the  complexity and dynamic nature of technological development and  do not account for feedbacks. The workshop succeeded in  raising issues related to the concepts of equity and  differentiation among Annex I Parties. The workshop  recommended that the AGBM address the following: appropriate  levels of emissions limitation and reduction; timing of the  implementation of QELROs; whether equity principles will be  reflected in a protocol or another legal instrument through a  differentiation regime; and how new ideas - such as the  possibility of drawing a distinction between production- and  consumption-related emission budgets and 'safe emission  corridors' - help in setting QELROs.

The Chair noted the great emphasis placed on analysis and  assessment at previous meetings, but said very little had been  done on the substance of the issues. He said the workshop  helped in that regard. He also reflected on external debt as  another cost to developing countries and said perhaps it is  time for developed countries to pay their debt, which was  incurred as a result of the industrial revolution. In addition  to possible country objectives, group objectives for  reductions could be considered.

SAUDI ARABIA said that setting QELROs is not only the business  of Annex I countries and expressed surprise at the low level  of participation of developing countries in the workshop.  Regarding energy modeling and the energy-related discussions,  he reminded delegates that the AGBM mandate calls for  consideration of other gases and other sectors that would  contribute to reduction of the foreseen costs. He also called  for consideration of equity issues from an international  perspective, not simply among the Annex I Parties, because the  issues affect non-Annex I countries. He requested examination  of the issues to avoid having losers among the group.

The Chair responded that preparations for the workshop  included invitations for all possible participants and that  OPEC was invited but declined to attend. He said the analysis  must end and actions must begin at some point. He also said he  did not recall anyone talking about the effect of measures on  developing countries when OPEC raised oil prices twenty years  ago.

BRAZIL stated that it may be appropriate to initially  establish an overall aggregate quantitative objective and then  negotiate the relative participation of countries or the  sharing among countries. The group would have a priori an idea  of the effect of the objectives on the climate. They would be  negotiated so that the overall emissions of Annex I countries  would be within quantitative objectives. He also said the  principle of common but differentiated responsibilities could  justify estimating the relevant contributions of each country  to the relative climate change.

COSTA RICA, on behalf of the G-77/China, said that the AGBM  must move forward on emission targets. The G-77/China has  insisted that overall emissions are the important issue and  that emissions should be reduced to 1990 levels. He recalled  the COP decision that there would be no new commitments for  developing countries and that the extent to which developing  country Parties can implement the Convention depends on the  developed countries. He reminded developed countries of their  obligation to provide for full agreed costs through the  interim financial mechanism, but said putting the resources in  the GEF is not the same thing as making them available  directly to developing countries.

The Chair said that this final point must be made with the  utmost clarity to the SBI and called upon Costa Rica, as Chair  of the G-77/China, to raise it. TURKEY cited its GDP per  capita, anthropogenic emissions per capita and unit of  territory and levels of production and consumption of energy  per capita. He said it was evident that Turkey's contribution  to global warming was a fraction of the average of the Annex I  countries.

JAPAN said commitments should be strengthened by combining  policies and measures and QELROs, using short-term and medium-  or long-term time scales with both legally-binding and target  commitments. New commitments need to be flexible to heighten  agreement and acceptance. He emphasized development of  differential criteria and indicators to ensure equity in  commitments based on variable marginal emission reduction  costs and different past efforts at mitigation and limitation  among parties. ITALY, on behalf of the EU, said based on IPCC  projections of atmospheric C02 stabilization levels and  temperature increase, a level of 550 parts per million should  guide limitation and reduction efforts. Collective objectives  for Annex I Parties could group emissions for all Annex I  Parties or group emissions of OECD and non-OECD countries.  Either arrangement would require equitable sharing within each  group. Individual objectives could be uniform or  differentiated by limitations and reductions. Economic and  demographic indicators, equity criteria and flexibility to  reduce economic impact and mitigation costs are among  considerations to establish equitable and timely  differentiation. Longer timeframes would be useful for  planning and investment decisions, but shorter timeframes,  such as 2005 and 2010, are also important for accountability  and monitoring. ROMANIA called for flexibility and cost  effective reductions. She said Romania has used bottom-up  approaches that permit reductions without supplementary costs.

SAMOA, on behalf of AOSIS, said the AOSIS draft protocol  addresses gases other than C02, calling for targets and  timetables at the first meeting of protocol Parties. He said  there is a need to strengthen commitments beyond 20% below  1990 C02 emissions by 2005. Discussions on flexibility in time  scales are compromising or are likely to compromise the urgent  need for GHG emission reductions. He reiterated the need for  urgent reductions to occur within a safe emissions corridor to  prevent irreversible or dangerous interference with the  climate system.

NIGERIA said stabilizing emissions at 1990 levels will be  costly for the world economy and will not lead to significant  abatement compared with business as usual scenarios. Some  countries, mainly developing ones, would be worse off, so  there is a need to analyze economic impacts, not as a delaying  tactic but to allay genuine fears. CHINA said reduction  objectives and policies and measures are integrated, with  policies and measures as means to achieve targets.

GERMANY proposed C02 reduction objectives of 10% by 2005 and  15-20% by 2010, both against a base year of 1990. She said it  is an ambitious and necessary approach that would also devise  targets and timetables for non-C02 emissions. An additional  target for 2020 is possible, but uncertainties mean it is too  far into the future to reliably guide efforts now. The  objectives should be binding, with some flexibility for  economies in transition, and would fit into the protocol  structure proposed by the EU. She said the single gas approach  has greater precision, avoiding C02 equivalent calculations of  greenhouse warming potentials that could make a combined gas  approach difficult. The flat rate reduction has proven worth,  simplicity and practicality, and accounts for different  starting points by measuring efforts against historical  emissions. There are other equity approaches, such as  differential targets, but there are practical difficulties in  generating indicators. The proposal does not affect Germany's  commitment to a 25% emissions reduction by 2005. She requested  that the Secretariat compile proposals submitted so far and  submissions received by 15 April 1996 into a single document  for AGBM 4 and COP-2.

AUSTRALIA said success will be enhanced by recognizing country  circumstances. Flexibility can create opportunities for wider  and more effective action and will deliver the most effective  environmental result. He supported differentiation between  Parties for equity, using possible criteria and indicators for  equitable burden sharing. He proposed rules for determining  equitable effort based on the ability to pay principle;  mitigation action should be proportional to capacity to pay;  countries of comparable income should face comparable per  capita costs; and mitigation should be proportional to  emissions, current or projected.

The US said the QELROs workshop and a US analysis showed:  different views on how to implement targets and timetables and  on an environmentally and cost-effective structure; the need  for work on possible differentiation between Parties; and that  level, timing, location and sharing of action affect costs and  environmental impacts and benefits. The next steps must be  environmentally sustainable and cost effective and provide  flexibility in the implementation of obligations. Flexibility  of emissions timing and location allows countries to choose  cost-effective paths. Consensus does not yet exist on next  steps. MALAYSIA said the AOSIS draft protocol should form a  basis to elaborate on quantified targets. Flexibility in time  and place of reductions could allow countries to delay and  transfer their commitment to others. Because of opportunities  and technology available, he suggested a quantified C02 target  rather than a comprehensive approach. For equitable burden  sharing, and differences between starting points and economic  structure among Annex I countries, a methodology is needed  including indicators to facilitate a quantitative target.  AUSTRIA is committed to the Toronto Target as a national  target and will increase efforts in the face of evidence it  may not reach the target. He supported a gas-by-gas approach  and comprehensive monitoring. A flat rate has merit, and  binding reduction objectives give incentive for early action.

CANADA restated its support for the conclusions contained in  the SAR. She supported further examination of concepts such as  collective emission objectives (bubble concept) to determine  how such a programme would be implemented. She stressed the  importance of ensuring equitable burden-sharing and said a  differentiated approach must take into account different  national circumstances. On timeframes, Canada suggested  establishing an objective for the medium- to long-term to  avoid preclusion of any options.

The MARSHALL ISLANDS said the workshop last week showed that  emissions reduction was not a matter of 'if,' but 'when' and  'how much more.' A possible 80% loss of land in the Marshall  Islands makes this issue more than dangerous. He said it is  misleading to look at the economic costs of reducing oil  revenues, because we cannot put a cost on the total cultural  and physical obliteration of the Marshall Islands.

IRAN reminded delegates that the Convention contains  provisions on sources and sinks and calls for balanced action.  He said that enhancement of sinks is as vital as emission  reductions and stressed the importance of aforestation and  reforestation in Annex I countries. For setting QELROs,  analysis of socioeconomic impacts must be integral. P&M should  not create any disguised barriers to trade, particularly for  developing countries, and should address all gases in a  quantified manner.

The NETHERLANDS said the IPCC report presents the best  available science and, although the information is incomplete,  the AGBM must make initial judgments now. He supported the  Marshall Islands in noting that the scenario presented by the  IPCC threatens the continuing existence of many countries. The  question is not whether the world can afford to save small  island States, but how to lower emissions at the lowest  possible cost. He said the concept of safe emission corridors  warrants further examination and proposed a follow-up  workshop. He highlighted emission budgets as a good tool to  minimize the costs and create incentives for early action, and  suggested compiling a document on applying this concept.

The RUSSIAN FEDERATION stated that new requests for reductions  by his country were premature. The Russian Federation has  already reduced its emissions and is currently restructuring  its economic potential. The preconditions for raising the  question of additional obligations will occur when Russia's  GDP per capita is comparable to the OECD countries. He  emphasized that P&M should not prevent sustainable development  and should account for specific social and economic  situations. Recommendations from the workshop were obviously  written by experts from OECD countries. POLAND said that  quantification of targets is the most important issue for the  AGBM. On criteria, timetables and commitments, there must be  more specific proposals. He proposed establishing an ad hoc  group of technical experts to elaborate specific proposals.  NEW ZEALAND stated that consideration of the SAR last week  should clarify the importance of the AGBM. This group faces  real world threats of catastrophic proportions. He stressed  that equity and efficiency both may be served by international  economic instruments. While such instruments raise difficult  issues, the options should be left open.

TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO said Brazil's proposal on QELROs provided  a logical way forward and Germany's proposal provided impetus  to the work of the AGBM. He said the gas-by-gas approach is  the simplest and most effective, and expressed surprise at  Australia's idea of equity. Each country could propose an idea  of equity that suits its own needs. SLOVENIA agreed that  equity was an important consideration and supported the flat  rate approach. He said work should start now if an agreement  is expected by COP-3 and drew attention to the need to examine  how economic development will affect GHG reduction. KENYA said  that statements by Annex I Parties show their willingness to  support new targets. She noted that the EU is on track to  lower its levels and hoped that all Annex I Parties could  follow suit. NORWAY called for differentiated commitments for  individual Parties. This will require sophisticated  approaches, but the workshop revealed several suggestions. He  said the flat-rate approach is not cost-effective and noted  that a cost-effective approach will facilitate agreement on  more ambitious commitments.

THAILAND said the IPCC report stresses the need to immediately  reduce emissions. He said developed countries should strive  for legally-binding targets before flexibility should be  allowed. He called for narrowing the range of options to  accelerate the process. VENEZUELA said the impact of  implementation must be addressed. Venezuela, like others, is  toiling under a burden of foreign debt and needs foreign  assistance to carry out social programmes. He said developed  countries have promised to stabilize their emissions, but even  if projected increases are reduced, they will still be far  from reaching the target. SAUDI ARABIA noted that many Parties  had referred to IPPC measures and findings, and said it is  premature to have conclusions on this issue. The SBSTA report  shows that different points of view were voiced and that  delegates agreed to leave the issue to another session. The  two lists should be on an equal footing when referred to at  the AGBM. The Chair said the Group would not re-open that  discussion now.

SAMOA, on behalf of AOSIS, noted that the proposals provide a  range of useful policies and measures, but such proposals  alone, without QELROs, cannot significantly advance this  process. The approach laid out by the EU can be strengthened  by placing these policies and measures within a legally- binding target and by development of specific performance  targets. NORWAY noted that the removal of subsidies is  particularly pertinent to creating market incentives for  environmentally sound behavior. The IPCC also reports that  there are several no regrets measures, including replacement  of biased taxation. The risk of aggregate damage provides  rationale beyond these measures. JAPAN said the AGBM must not  focus solely on quantified objectives, but also on P&M. He  proposed establishing mechanisms that review P&M and enhance  them step-by-step. He did not favor compelling all Annex I  Parties to take specific measures and said Parties must retain  flexibility. In order to integrate differences, the AGBM  should introduce C02 efficiency in a protocol.

Delegates agreed to continue discussions on QELROs and  policies and measures. They requested that the Secretariat  prepare a compilation of propsals relating to the treatment of  QELROs and P&M in a protocol or another legal instrument and  that the IPCC prepare a technical paper on possible P&M.

## CONTINUING TO ADVANCE IMPLEMENTATION OF ARTICLE 4.1

The AGBM considered commitments of non-Annex I Parties on  Thursday, 7 March, reviewing the introduction of guidelines  for non-Annex I Parties' national communications presented at  the previous week's SBSTA and SBI meetings.

COSTA RICA, on behalf of the G-77/China, said the AGBM is on a  separate track. It must consider its own momentum and  concentrate on strengthening the Annex I Parties' commitments.  The G-77/China did not consider this a key item and warned  against spending too much time with it. He recalled the  workshop on communications of non-Annex I Parties that led to  the G-77/China position paper submitted to the subsidiary  bodies. It reflects the spirit of UNCED and represents a great  step forward in advancing non-Annex I Parties' commitments.  The SBI requested the Secretariat to facilitate assistance on  follow-up fora.

The US said all countries can further their activities for  growth and protect the environment at the same time. He noted  that the IPCC points out several P&M that require little or no  costs. He supported the G-77/China proposal for an additional  workshop and regional meetings on best practices. He suggested  using the multilateral consultative process to be developed  under Article 13 as a vehicle and said an additional component  must be a firm commitment to an ongoing work programme on  technology. The EU said the information in national  communications is an essential first step and added that the  GEF should meet the agreed full cost by non-Annex I Parties.  In light of the projected increase in GHG emissions, the AGBM  should focus on facilitating technology cooperation.

INDIA stressed the importance of national communications as  part of an ongoing process. He said the issues of technology  transfer and finance related to the developing countries had  been deliberated at great length by the subsidiary bodies. The  AGBM focus is not on the non-Annex I countries, but on  strengthening Annex I Parties' commitments. That is the  foundation and there should be no distraction from that goal.

JAPAN said that national communications by all Parties are as  important as strengthening Article 4.2 (a) and (b). P&M  enhance equity among Parties. While he appreciated the G-77/China proposal on guidelines, he expects further  elaboration at another workshop. National communications are  important not only for Annex I Parties but for non-Annex I  Parties to project future emissions.

CANADA said climate change is a global problem and requires an  effective international response. She stressed the importance  of widely disseminating the findings of the SAR and increased  public awareness on the issue. She noted the strong interest  of non-Annex I Parties to support indigenous capacity building  and said AIJ offers private sector investment opportunities.

AUSTRALIA welcomed indications that Parties have increased  their efforts on national communications. He said the adoption  of an initial AIJ pilot phase is a positive step and noted the  developing countries' interest in adaptation planning. He said  all Parties must take on specific new actions beyond those  already underway and said many no regrets opportunities are  available. BRAZIL reported on a workshop on a possible format  for non-Annex I Parties' national communications. He said this  exercise was extremely useful and additional workshops may be  in order.

The PHILIPPINES said the references to Article 4.1 must not be  taken in isolation. She said that the advancing of commitments  will not introduce any new commitments for non-Annex-I Parties  and that Article 4.1 notes that all Parties have  differentiated commitments. She welcomed recognition of the G-77/China proposal. The COOK ISLANDS said many delegations are  aware of efforts in the Pacific Islands. He looks forward to  implementation of CC:TRAIN. NEW ZEALAND said the AGBM's core  objective refers to Annex I Parties, but the Group must not  lose sight of the obligations of all Parties. He welcomed  SBSTA's progress on non-Annex I communications and said that  for small low-lying island countries, adaptation is a  particular concern. He suggested enhanced liaison to make sure  multilateral institutions integrate climate change concerns  into their operations.

## POSSIBLE FEATURES OF A PROTOCOL OR ANOTHER LEGAL INSTRUMENT

On Wednesday, 6 March, the Secretariat introduced a note on  possible features of a protocol or another legal instrument  (FCCC/AGBM/1996/4). The note states that Parties will need to  consider which type of instrument would be most viable in the  current context - a protocol, an amendment or another legal or  quasi-legal instrument. The institutional mechanism will  largely depend on the choice of instrument and the type of  substantive commitments it will contain. The note also  contains an annex comparing the procedures relating to a  protocol and an amendment. Delegates also had before them a  compilation of comments from the Parties  (FCCC/AGBM/1996/MISC.1). The Chair said the options open to  the AGBM are plentiful, but the possibilities in terms of a  protocol can be affected by the need to obtain a sufficient  majority. He mentioned several alternative approaches and said  delegates should decide which one will be the most effective.  He noted that ideally Parties to the Convention would also be  Parties to the protocol, but it is possible this will not  happen.

URUGUAY stated that any agreement reached should be as binding  as possible, but noted that some delegates become fearful when  the word protocol is mentioned. Whatever apprehensions arise  may be linked to uncertainty, but the uncertainty does not  dispel the risk. He urged delegates to avoid sending signals  that weaken the Convention. CHILE said the AGBM needs to take  a political decision and recalled that when the UNFCCC was  negotiated, the EU made a binding declaration to establish a  stronger sense of commitment. Action can be taken without  jeopardizing the unity of the Convention and the AGBM should  direct its effort towards that objective. He supported a  protocol and called for an instrument that would not divide  the Parties.

SENEGAL said that the AGBM cannot continue to 'mutter and  stammer' when faced with such historic events. The Convention  is at a crossroads and Parties must assume their  responsibilities. He recalled that amending the Basel  Convention was not easy but was nonetheless achieved. The AGBM  needs to find the best, simplest and most effective approach.  CHINA said there were many precedents for adopting a protocol  or amendment, but noted that the need for Annex I countries to  strengthen their commitments must not be forgotten. She did  not favor setting up other mechanisms because it will lead to  coordination problems and increase bureaucracy.

ARGENTINA emphasized the importance of persevering in the  effort to agree on the rules of procedure to revitalize the  negotiations. It seems unprecedented for a Convention of this  importance to lack it own rules of procedure, particularly  while discussing a protocol. He stressed the need to arrive a  solution in July. He said delegates should remember that a  Secretariat with considerable human resources already exists  and there are already commitments in the Convention. SAMOA, on  behalf of AOSIS, recalled that AOSIS submitted its draft  protocol at COP-1 and said the protocol is intended to  complement, not supplant, the Convention.

In the afternoon of Thursday, 7 March, the Chair opened  discussion of this item by noting Germany's suggestion to  compile proposals. He said a compilation document will include  proposals from AOSIS, the German elements paper, the Russian  Federation, and the EU protocol structure. He also recommended  that delegates consider institutional economy. There is a  general understanding that the Convention Secretariat should  also be the protocol secretariat, but the Conference of the  Parties could be different because the Convention and a  protocol could have different constituencies.

The RUSSIAN FEDERATION said a protocol should have reachable  rather than utopian benchmarks that Parties at variable levels  of development can attain with differentiated responsibility.  A protocol rather than amendments with joint but  differentiated commitments would produce the most complete  results. He proposed a regional approach that would require  regional scenarios from the IPCC with quantitative  measurements of GHGs on a separate basis. Elements for  countries with economies in transition are contained in  FCCC/AGBM/1996/MISC.1. They include scientific, technological  and economic activities as well as cooperation with Annex II  Parties in technology introduction, attracting financial  resources and AIJ. The US supported analysis and assessment,  but said the stakes are too high and risks too great to seek  refuge in scientific uncertainty. He urged COP-2 to resolve  the rules of procedure, but said the rules of amendment do not  depend on the rules of procedure. Although the US does not  prefer an amendment over a protocol, he said an amendment has  merit because it would: not raise complex institutional  questions; simplify the process, and follow the worldwide  trend of streamlining international instruments. Ratification  of a protocol, never speedy, argues for an amendment, but  delegates should wait to decide on the form until the agreed  commitments are clear.

ESTONIA supported the EU structure as the basis for  negotiations. He welcomed the differentiation of the  responsibilities of Parties and said the main criteria should  be GDP per capita and other GHG emission factors.

CANADA said delegates can only decide to seek an amendment or  protocol when the nature and scope of commitments are  developed. It is simpler to apply existing institutions to an  amendment than a protocol. A separate bureau would be needed  for an amendment. Given the impasse on the rules of procedure,  a protocol can only be adopted by consensus, whereas an  amendment can be adopted by a three-quarters majority. Use of  existing institutions should be maximized. The instrument  chosen should have the capacity to evolve. Roles should be  explored and elaborated for all Parties. ITALY, on behalf of  the EU, said the EU has already expressed preference for a  protocol. It is preferable to avoid new institutions as much  possible. Institutions of quasi-legal or soft law would not  meet AGBM requirements. Communication and review are more  important for a protocol, which would probably lead to  enhanced need for review. The Article 13 process should  produce a multilateral consultative process that could be  adapted.

JAPAN said provisions must incorporate measures that lead to  technology transfer, AIJ and review mechanisms. He said it  will become necessary that an international framework for  joint implementation be given a role by 2000.

COSTA RICA, on behalf of the G-77/China, said delegates first  need to resolve the internal regulations of a protocol. The  Secretariat should organize a forum to discuss social and  economic effects of proposed P&M.

AUSTRALIA said irrespective of form, the legal instrument  needs to address all GHGs, sources and sinks in a  comprehensive manner, as well as all the BM. It is difficult  to finalize the form until content is more advanced, but  delegates should look at use of other instruments, like  decisions and guidelines, considering the advantages and  disadvantages of a separate legal instrument. He endorsed a  rigorous effort to reduce costs and the preference to avoid  new institutions. POLAND prefers a protocol, as explained by  the EU and Russian Federation. It should cover only issues in  the BM and not include institutional and other issues. NEW  ZEALAND supported the 'non-proliferation principle' of a  single Secretariat and utilizing existing subsidiary bodies.  Rules should apply mutatis mutandi. Reporting requirements  could be consolidated to reduce the burden on national  ministries. SAMOA, on behalf of AOSIS, said the group had  stated its position on form and content. A legally-binding  instrument is part of the preferred AGBM output. Time should  not be spent on the form until QELROs decisions are completed.  He accepted simplification and non-proliferation. Urgency  means delegates must resolve the rules of procedure.

CHINA said the BM states that the process will produce a  legally-binding document. The thrust is to strengthen Annex I  Parties' commitments. It cannot be a comprehensive regime but  can only be of a specific scope that strengthens a specific  area of the Convention. Existing institutions can carry out  new commitments.

Delia Villagrasa, on behalf of Climate Action Network, said  the IPCC SAR shows there is no basis for delay or lack of  action but much that demands quick response. Emissions  reduction levels must be science-driven, limiting  environmental damage and restricting temperature change to .1   per decade and to 1  total. Results from the Netherlands  environmental agency's IMAGE 2 model presented at a workshop  demonstrate the need for 2010 emission limits at 19-46% below  1990 levels, with larger reductions to be safe. The AOSIS  protocol would be a first step toward the AGBM's goal. It fits  the safe corridor/landing concept, which seeks atmospheric GHG  levels that would not cause dangerous climate interference. A  legally-binding instrument is essential. Debate over  differentiation cannot derail the process. She welcomed  recognition that AGBM 3 marks the end of the analysis and  assessment and that real negotiations are underway.

## REPORT OF THE SESSION

Delegates considered the Chair's draft conclusions regarding  inputs from subsidiary bodies, P&M, and QELROs. Regarding  inputs from subsidiary bodies, the conclusions note that many  Parties underlined the importance of the IPCC SAR, but others  considered it premature to draw conclusions and pointed to  scientific uncertainties. The section on P&M notes the  importance of the workshop and notes that in the context of  the analysis and assessment the AGBM considered two general  orientations: a menu approach to P&M and a categorization of  P&M in annexes to a protocol according to the degree to which  Annex I Parties would be committed to implement them. The  section also notes there were differing views on the need for  international harmonization. On QELROs, the AGBM underlined  the interdependence between QELROs and P&M and noted that some  Parties stressed QELROs as a first priority. The conclusions  also note the range of options and variations, and recognize  the wide range of issues related to equity and differentiation  and the discussions on economic and cost issues. The  conclusions request the Secretariat to prepare, for AGBM 4, a  compilation of proposals relating to the treatment of QELROs  and P&M in a protocol or another legal instrument tabled to  date or received by the Secretariat no later than 15 April  1996.

The Chair convened an informal session to hear further  comments and noted the need for follow-up on workshops to  focus the Group's work. He proposed to convene informal  roundtables at the fourth session on specific points related  to QELROs and P&M and encouraged all delegates to participate.  They will be designed to allow for further discussion on  questions surrounding QELROs, such as differentiation, and  P&M, such as the impact on developing countries. Regarding  P&M, CHINA proposed adding a reference to QELROs to note that  the two concepts are integrated. The NETHERLANDS disagreed,  arguing that not every P&M aspect is linked to QELROs, and  asked for flexibility.

The Chair also presented conclusions on continuing to advance  the implementation of Article 4.1. The conclusions note that  the Chair of the G-77/China referred to the position paper on  non-Annex I Parties' initial communications. The conclusions  also contain a paragraph noting the emphasis of the G-77/China  on this issue and a paragraph noting the views of Annex I  Parties on this issue. The AGBM also noted the intention of  non-Annex I Parties to conduct a workshop, as a follow-up to  the earlier one, to address issues relating to implementation,  and requested the Secretariat to facilitate assistance in this  regard.

COSTA RICA, on behalf of the G-77/China, proposed a new  paragraph that states: Many Parties stressed that by formally  presenting the G-77/China position paper on initial  communications from non-Annex I Parties, the implementation of  their existing commitments in Article 4.1 had been  sufficiently advanced. He also proposed that the relationship  between the commitments of non-Annex I Parties and the  provision of financial resources and transfer of technology  must be taken into full account. Delegates accepted the  paragraph as amended. The G-77/China also proposed that the  AGBM note the agreement in the SBSTA and SBI that their  position paper would be the principal basis to adopt and  implement the guidelines and format. The US said there should  be no implication that the AGBM will decide on these  guidelines because that is the SBSTA's work.

On possible features of a protocol or another legal  instrument, the conclusions note that the AGBM agreed on the  need to avoid the proliferation of new bodies. It stressed the  importance of institutional economy in this regard. The  conclusions note the comments of the Parties:Several Parties queried the need for the establishment of a  separate Conference of the Parties and a separate Bureau in a  protocol regime.

Many Parties stated that only a legally-binding instrument  would meet the requirements of the BM, while others reminded  the group that the focus was to strengthen commitments.

Many Parties stated their preference for a protocol, while  other stressed the importance of awaiting further  developments.

Several delegations stressed the importance of the  communications and review of information in an amendment or  protocol regime.

The G-77/China requested a reference to 'Convention  provisions' when listing the items that the AGBM had stressed  in order to emphasize the link between the Convention and any  possible protocol. SAMOA proposed changing a sentence that  stated 'Many Parties' agreed that only a legally-binding  instrument would meet the requirements of the BM, to 'The AGBM  agreed' but KUWAIT objected. Delegates also debated a  reference that states AGBM noted some Parties said an  amendment might be a more viable option, considering the lack  of consensus on the rules of procedure.  INDIA, KUWAIT, CHILE  and CHINA objected to a reference to the need for information  'in evolving commitments for all Parties.'  CANADA and the US  called for its retention.

The Chair then convened a formal session to adopt the report  of the meeting (FCCC/AGBM/1996/L.1). In a paragraph noting the  statement of the IPCC Chair, the last sentence says that he  concluded by stating that the economies of all countries could  benefit from the implementation of policies and measures to  mitigate climate change. CHINA asked if this was fair and  requested its deletion. The Chair said this was an accurate  reflection of the statement and he would not accept  'censorship.' VENEZUELA and KUWAIT requested that the record  reflect their reservations on the same issue. The group  adopted the report.

# A BRIEF ANALYSIS OF AGBM 3

Those who view intergovernmental negotiations as a dance might  say that a veil or two dropped at the third meeting of the Ad  Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate. Having sashayed gently around  key issues for two meetings, delegates finally spoke their  minds. Revealed were a new proposal from Germany on specific  emissions reductions targets, Japan's recommendation to  incorporate joint implementation officially in future  commitments, and even unabashed insistence from Canada and the  US that all Parties should eventually take on new commitments.  AGBM 3 may eventually be remembered as the week that this  round of climate change negotiations became explicit.

AGBM leaders set an aggressive tone from the start of the  session. Chair Raúl Estrada Oyuela declared that he would not  tolerate obstruction from delegates who had tried to slow  negotiations before. His determination appeared to be matched  by support from the floor, as friends of the Chair were ready  to respond when oil producing countries or others called for  delaying or diverting AGBM decisions. Executive Secretary  Michael Zammit-Cutajar helped to define the determined mood by  presenting a vision of a long-term shift of emissions from  developed to developing countries, while still seeking climate  stabilization. His broad notion of resource transfer and  cooperation placed the consideration of new commitments in a  more essential, sustainable development context than more  typical debate over purely financial transfers from developed  to developing countries. It also touched the heart and  greatest challenge of negotiations: whether over 150 countries  could come to a common view of political, industrial and  social change required to achieve sustainable climate policy.

Delegates and observers attributed at least part of the  meeting's added inspiration to the results of the IPCC Second  Assessment Report, which was adopted in December. The  projections of rapid change, adverse impacts and stronger  attribution to 'discernible human influence' seemed to put the  consideration of new commitments into an accelerated rhythm.

In addition to the specific proposals, a number of general  concepts gained attention at AGBM 3, including flexibility,  differential criteria and indicators, equity and trade.  Introduced by the US and others at AGBM 2, flexibility  featured in numerous Annex I countries' presentations as a  prerequisite to new commitments. Germany and the Russian  Federation prefer to reserve flexibility for countries with  economies in transition, but many others appear to want to  apply the idea more widely to the timing, location and,  possibly, type of steps a country might take to reduce GHG  emissions. Where developed countries questioned the G-77/China's desire at the subsidiary bodies meetings to build  flexibility into their reporting proposals, the tables turned  as Annex I countries sought to incorporate flexibility into  their own commitments at AGBM 3. AOSIS was among the few  voices criticizing the impact of flexibility, saying it could  compromise commitments to emission reductions. Malaysia also  criticized flexibility, but at the same time positively  presented ideas on indicators for equitable sharing, another  idea Annex I countries were promoting related to differential  commitments.

Several ideas were floated that would divide shared  commitments among Annex I countries based on GDP or other  economic indicators, emissions and other factors. Germany was  a rare Annex I critic of differential targets, suggesting that  generating indicators would be impractical. Proponents argued  that differential or shared targets would enhance fairness and  equity among those responsible for emissions. Like the debate  on flexibility, the key questions are whether differential,  shared targets can enhance the effectiveness of possible new  commitments in reducing possible climate change and adverse  impacts, how they would be negotiated and whether they provide  suitable accountability. The emphasis on equity, combined with  frequent calls for cost-effectiveness, could lay a complex set  of economic considerations across the negotiators' path to new  commitments.

The other challenge introduced at AGBM 3 was the trade impact  of potential policies and measures. Recent negotiations in the  WTO Committee on Trade and Environment reportedly bogged down  over conflicting views on how trade negotiators preferred to  address trade measures in multilateral environmental  agreements. Similar concerns over market access, eco-labeling  and barriers to trade were raised for the first time at the  AGBM by a range of countries, including those who have been  least eager to take new measures against climate change.

Notably missing from AGBM 3 were sustained debates over the  need for, extent and timing of analysis and assessment.  Perhaps the Chair's initial warning that delegates should be  willing to complete analytical work and move toward decisions  took hold. Whatever the cause, those countries emphasizing  socioeconomic assessment did not seem as adamant that such  study precede or prevent other activities.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR BEFORE COP-2

### CONFERENCES ON ACTIVITIES IMPLEMENTED JOINTLY (AIJ)

Regional  Conference on Joint Implementation: Countries in Transition.  This Conference will be held from 17-19 April 1996 in the  Hotel Ambassador, Václavské, nám 5-7, 111 24 Prague, Czech  Republic and is sponsored by the UNEP Regional Office for  Europe, the governments of the Netherlands and Norway. The  Conference is organized under the auspices of the Ministry of  the Environment of the Czech Republic. Further information is  available from SEVEn, Mr. Milo Tichý, P.O. Box 39, 120 56  Prague 2, Czech Republic, tel: +42 2 2424 7552; fax: +42 2  2424 7597; email: seven@earn.cvut.cz. Information is also  available on the Internet at http://www.org.ji.

UNEP Conference on Activities Implemented Jointly under the  UNFCCC: Structuring Opportunities for Building Consensus and  Promoting International Cooperation. The Conference is being  organized by the UNEP and the World Foundation for Environment  and Development (WFED) and will be held 20-24 May 1996 at the  Herradura International Conference Center, San Jose, Costa  Rica. For more information contact: UNEP Conference on AIJ,  c/o WFED, 1101 30th Street, NW-Suite 500, Washington, DC 20007  USA. Fax: +1-202-686-3771.

### IPCC WORKSHOPS

The IPCC will convene three workshops for the  further development of the Guidelines for National GHG  Inventories on the following topics: sources and removal by  sinks of greenhouse gases from land use and forestry (Sao José  dos Campos, Sao Paulo, 21-22 March 1996); emissions from fuel  combustion and industrial processes (Abingdon, UK, 29-30 March  1996); and, methane emissions from rice cultivation (Bangkok,  Thailand, 30 April - 2 May 1996). The results will be  incorporated as additions and/or revisions to the guidelines,  and approved at IPCC-12, scheduled for the week of 9 September  1996 in Mexico. For more information contact: IPCC  Secretariat, WMO, 41 Av. Giuseppe-Motta, C.P. N  2300, 1211  Geneva 2 Switzerland, tel: +41 22 7308 215/254/284, fax: +41  22 7331 270 OMM CH, e-mail: narasimhan.sundararaman@itu.ch.

### REGIONAL WORKSHOPS

A Workshop on Climate Change  Vulnerability and Adaptation in Latin America will take place  in Montevideo, Uruguay, from 22-24 April 1996. The workshop is  sponsored by the US Country Studies Program (USCSP), the  Comisión Nacional sobre el Cambio Global and the Inter- American Institute for Global Change Research (invited). For  more information contact: Annie Hareau or Cecilia Ramos-Mañé,  Comisión Nacional sobre el Cambio Global, Cuidadela 1414, Piso  6, Montevideo 11100, Uruguay, Tel/Fax: +598-2 932088 or  Tel/Fax: +598-2 922416, e-mail: iaiuy@attmail.com; or  Christopher B. Bordeaux or Jack Fitzgerald , USCSP, 1000  Independence Ave., SW, PO-63, Washington, DC 20585, USA, tel:  +1-202 426-1637, fax: +1-202 426-1551, e-mail:  cbordeaux@igc.apc.org or jfitzgerald@igc.apc.org.

### THE SECOND MEETING OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES

COP-2  will be held 8-19 July 1996 in Geneva. The session will open  in plenary the first day, then suspend the plenary until  Wednesday, 17 July to allow for the sessions of the four  subsidiary bodies (AGBM, SBSTA, SBI and AG13) to take place.  The subsidiary bodies will provide inputs, including draft  decisions, for the various items on the COP-2 agenda. The  plenary will reconvene to conclude negotiations and adopt  decisions on 17-19 July.