---
title: "HIGHLIGHTS FROM MEETING OF THE AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE 6 AUGUST 1997"
id: enb1253e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1253e
date: 1997-08-06
abstract: "The Chair of the Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate (AGBM)  conducted an observer briefing in the morning. The non- group on quantified emission limitation and reduction  objectives (QELROs) met in the morning, and the non-group  on elements related to institutions and mechanisms met in  the afternoon. The Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI)  concluded its work in a morning session and the Subsidiary  Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA)  concluded its work in the afternoon."
---

# OBSERVER BRIEFING

AGBM Chair Raúl Estrada-Oyuela (Argentina) convened a  morning briefing for observers on the previous day's  progress. The Chair of the non-group on QELROs confirmed  that Parties had decided to define the framework of an  agreement before proceeding to specify QELROs. He said it  was unlikely that numbers would be discussed this week and  suggested that an attempt to do so might embarrass some  Parties. The Parties would, however, discuss distribution  of QELROS. He added that some Parties continued to oppose  flexibility, i.e. trading and joint implementation. The  text on these topics would remain in brackets. He will also  prepare a text on measurements and communications.

The Chair of the non-group on institutions said that  discussion had concentrated on the final part of the  Protocol, and specifically addressed the question of  linking the Protocol with the FCCC. A protocol would be  independent but some delegates expressed confusion as to  how this could be reflected in the protocol.

The Chair of the non-group on Article 4.1 indicated that  its text would be altered due to consultations that had  taken place since the weekend. The Chair of a newly formed  non-group on policies and measures reported that some  delegates believe that there is no reason to have a section  on policies and measures given the provisions in the FCCC.  Others support a full section with elements on the major  sectors related to energy.

# SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION

Chair Mohamed Ould El Ghaouth (Mauritania) noted that most  decisions by the contact groups were outlined in the draft  report (FCCC/SBI/1997/L.2). The Rapporteur commented on the  SBI informal workshop considering updated information from  the national communications of Annex I Parties. He noted  that four presentations were made by the Secretariat on:  national inventories - actual trends between 1990-1995;  methodological issues arising from submitted inventories;  projections to 2000 and 2020; and policies and measures and  their specific effects. He noted that the Secretariat plans  to have additional information in time for the next session  of the subsidiary bodies.

The Chair called for consideration of the results from the  contact groups. The draft conclusions on communications  from Annex I Parties (FCCC/SBI/1997/CRP.5) were adopted  including, inter alia, that the Secretariat should submit a  report at SBI-7 on the progress of Annex I Parties in  returning to their 1990 levels of GHG emissions. The US  noted that their acceptance of the term 'individually or  jointly' in the draft text did not prejudice its position  on other texts being negotiated. The PHILIPPINES called for  the inclusion of a specific reference to Article 4.2 (b).

The Chair presented draft conclusions on communications  from non-Annex I Parties (FCCC/SBI/1997/CRP.4). He noted  that the contact group did not find sufficient time to  conclude the issue and will continue its consideration at  the October meeting. On review of the financial mechanism,  the Chair presented draft conclusions (FCCC/SBI/1997/CRP.3)  and stated that the group will continue to consider the  issue in October. A number of delegates noted concern that  a sub-paragraph in the draft report called on Parties to  submit their views on the financial mechanism by 8  September 1997. The Executive Secretary noted that if the  submissions are late, delegations will have little time to  consider the inputs. A compromise date of 15 September was  agreed.

On division of labor between SBSTA and SBI, delegates  confirmed the decision to recommend the draft decision for  adoption by COP-3. On volume of documentation, delegates  approved the draft decision for adoption by COP-3. The  draft notes, inter alia, the efforts of the Convention  secretariat to reduce the volume of documentation  (FCCC/SBI/1997/12). On mechanisms for consultations with  NGOs, the chair noted that a contact group will be created  at SBI-7 for consideration of this item. The SBI urged all  Parties to submit their views on this item by no later than  25 August. The Chair presented draft conclusions on  arrangements for intergovernmental meetings  (FCCC/SBI/1997/L.3; FCCC/SBI/1997/L.4;  FCCC/SBI/1997/CRP.6). On arrangements for COP-3, the  delegates accepted the draft conclusions including, inter  alia, that: COP-3 place on the Agenda for COP-4 the second  review of Article 4.2 (a) and (b); and that the paragraph  considering an informal dialogue among Ministers and other  Heads of Delegations be deleted. On arrangements for COP-4,  delegates accepted the draft conclusions including, inter  alia, that COP-4 be held in November 1998 in Bonn unless a  proposal by a Party to host the conference is received  before 30 September.

The Chair presented the draft conclusions on the programme  budget for 1998-1999 (FCCC/SBI/1997/CRP.2), and noted that  this will be a formal annex. The annex was adopted. The EU  said a fifteen percent increase in the budget over two  years shows the importance that the EU attaches to the  implementation and further development of the Convention.  The Executive Secretary expressed his appreciation for  early closure on this issue but noted that five of the ten  largest contributions for the year have still not been  received.

Parties adopted the report of SBI-6 while taking into  account the need to incorporate late decisions. The Chair  reminded Parties that they were duty bound to complete  their work in October as there would be no SBI meeting at  COP-3.

# SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE

Delegates discussed the remaining issues on their agenda  and considered a revised draft report of the meeting  (FCCC/SBSTA/1997/L.4). Delegates adopted the draft  conclusions on the division of labor between SBI and SBSTA  that were adopted by SBI. The Chair of the contact group on  methodological issues presented the group's revised draft  conclusions. He noted that the revised conclusions, inter  alia, request the Secretariat to prepare a progress report  on the work programme on methodologies and noted that  SBSTA-7 will begin consideration of terms of reference for  expert contributions and the review of technical documents.  The conclusions also contain an indicative budget for the  methodological work programme.

On methodological issues related to joint implementation,  the Chair recalled that the US, Canada, Norway and China  had held informal consultations. CHINA reported that the  group had not reached consensus. The Chair proposed that  the report of the meeting state that SBSTA had considered  the issue and decided to defer it for consideration at a  future session. CHINA proposed deleting the reference to  future consideration. The PHILIPPINES asked if the issue  would again be considered as a separate agenda item or  together with methodological issues. The US indicated the  need for further discussions and noted that the clearly  divergent views are evidenced by the fact that there are no  conclusions on this matter. Delegates agreed to the Chair's  proposal.

On national communications from Annex I countries,  delegates heard a presentation on the SBI workshop on Annex  I communications and agreed to take note of the  methodological issues outlined in the workshop report. On  non-Annex I communications, delegates agreed to refer to  the conclusions adopted by SBI.

On transfer of technologies, the revised draft conclusions  stated that SBSTA took note of the Secretariat's progress  reports and the technical report, and supported the  Secretariat's plans to prepare reports on the role of the  private sector and on enabling activities of governments  related to technology transfer. Under the draft  conclusions, SBSTA also encouraged the Secretariat to  extend its cooperation with other organizations with the  aim of, inter alia, improving the availability of climate  relevant data.

The draft conclusions also state that SBSTA discussed the  subject of intergovernmental technical advisory panels  (ITAPs) and noted that the Secretariat has been requested  to prepare a report on its experience in using the roster  of experts. It recalled that the subject of ITAPs,  including their possible establishment, would be considered  by SBSTA-7. SBSTA noted that the Secretariat had made use  of the roster in three expert meetings on technology and  technology transfer issues and recalled its request to  Parties to nominate experts for the roster. Delegates  recalled the conclusions that had been adopted at the last  SBSTA meeting and adopted the report of the meeting as  amended.

# NON-GROUP ON QELROS

The non-group on QELROS met in the morning and discussed  issues pertaining to coverage and distribution. Coverage  discussions were based on a draft text by the Chair. The  draft text proposed an Annex containing a list of six GHGs  to which QELROs would apply. The text included a provision  for the review of the gases listed under the Annex at the  first session of the COP after entry into force of the  agreement and at regular intervals thereafter. Criteria for  the addition of a GHG to the list were also included.

Some delegations objected to the inclusion of certain  criteria such as the availability of a reliable value for  the relative global warming potential of the gas and the  availability of a comparable methodology for estimation and  assessing the relevance of the gas to climate change.  Paragraphs on these topics were bracketed. The Chair  indicated that most countries agree on a comprehensive  approach according to which QELROs should apply to all  GHGs. He predicted that enlarging the GHG list would not  find objection as long as it is possible to measure  emissions and judge the relative global warming potential  of other gases in comparison to CO2.

A number of delegations requested that a reference to the  Berlin Mandate be included in the draft, and noted that a  comprehensive approach had been incorporated in the FCCC  and the Berlin Mandate. The Chair indicated that he would  seek guidance from the AGBM Chair on inclusion of  references to the Berlin Mandate and produce a new draft on  coverage based on the discussions.

There was a general exchange of views on distribution of  QELROs among Annex I countries. The discussion focused on  whether distribution should be based on a differentiated  approach or a flat rate target. Several delegations favored  the differentiated approach and underscored the need for  different commitments according to country-specific  conditions. These delegations indicated that the  differentiated approach sets the right trend for the future  and points to an equitable outcome. There was a suggestion  that countries should be able to negotiate their own  targets.

Other delegations favored the flat rate approach and  indicated that targets could be met either individually or  jointly. They noted that time constraints would make it  difficult to reach agreement on indicators for  differentiation before Kyoto. A delegation commented on  'fairness' and indicated that some flexibility should be  allowed through emissions trading and joint implementation.  Another delegation indicated that no negotiations could  start until targets are on the table.

# NON-GROUP ON INSTITUTIONS AND MECHANISMS

The non-group on institutions and mechanisms continued  discussions on proposals for Final Elements. Virtually  every item discussed remained in brackets at the end of the  meeting, with some delegates privately conceding that  certain proposals are being placed 'on ice' until some of  the encompassing issues at the AGBM have been cleared. On  the relationship to other agreements, a number of Parties  opposed a proposal on derogation on the grounds that it  would subordinate the Protocol to other pre-existing  institutions, particularly the World Trade Organization  (WTO). Another group of countries wanted to establish that  nothing in the Protocol would prejudice the rights and  obligations of WTO members. In a paragraph on a Party's  rights under international law, a number of Parties argued  that the proposal was simply a statement of the current  legal state of affairs, but others said the reference  should be retained.

Some Parties also argued that a paragraph on provisional  application of the instrument was redundant. Others  suggested that the provision could prove useful in helping  to overcome domestic legal obstacles. The fate of a  paragraph on ratification was linked to the outcome of  discussions on a proposal laying down restrictions under  the Protocol for regional economic organizations.

On entry into force, two main positions emerged. Some  supported ratification based on the number of signatories.  Others supported a 'weighted entry into force' linking  ratification to the percentage contributions to GHG  emissions of ratifying countries. A number of Parties  supported a proposal that would ensure that a Party's  withdrawal from the Protocol would not operate to limit its  liability for any claim accruing against it as a result of  economic injury sustained by developing countries.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

Delegates say that the brief discussions of joint  implementation during SBSTA and SBI on Tuesday, point to  abiding sensitivities between Annex I and non-Annex I  Parties over implementation and potential future  commitments. Wary of exploring JI before completing the  pilot phase of activities implemented jointly (AIJ) between  developed and developing countries, a number of developing  country delegates say that opening the issue in the  subsidiary bodies could establish it as an issue in future  AGBM negotiations, a result they oppose. They also want to  ensure that language on 'returning individually or jointly'  to earlier emissions levels applies only to Annex I  Parties. Developed countries supporting JI say that it is  an appropriate element of future commitments that should be  pursued in current negotiations. Although text on JI is  being examined in contact groups, this week's decisions are  not expected to resolve differences on the issue.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

## Non-Group on Institutions

The non-group meet at 10:00 am  in the Beethoven Room.

Non-Group on Policies and Measures: The non-group will meet  at 10:00 am and at 3:00 pm in the Maritim Room.

Non-Group on QELROs: The non-group is expected to meet at  3:00 pm in the Beethoven Room.