---
title: "SUMMARY OF THE UNFCCC WORKSHOP ON INNOVATIVE OPTIONS FOR FINANCING THE DEVELOPMENT AND TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGIES: 27-29 SEPTEMBER 2004"
id: enb12244e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12244e
date: 2004-09-29
abstract: "The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)  workshop on innovative options for financing the development and  transfer of technologies was held from 27-29 September 2004, in  Montreal, Canada. Attended by more than 60 representatives of  governments, intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental  organizations and the private sector, the workshop sought to  create a better understanding of innovative financing for  technology transfer under the Convention. The workshop also aimed  to share experiences and information on good practices for  financing technology transfer, and to catalyze innovate thinking  on the issue, as well as to help narrow any differences that  might exist."
---

The workshop included sessions focusing on the views and  perspectives of the financial sector, current practices and  lessons learned in development finance, and ongoing initiatives  for innovative thinking. It concluded with a session assessing the  workshop's outcomes and possible ways to move forward. The  discussions and outcomes of the workshop will be taken up by the  UNFCCC's Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice  (SBSTA) and its Expert Group on Technology Transfer (EGTT) in  December 2004 in Buenos Aires.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE UNFCCC AND TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER

Climate change is considered one of the most serious threats to  sustainable development, with adverse impacts expected on human  health, food security, economic activity, water and other natural  resources, and physical infrastructure. Global climate varies  naturally, but scientists agree that rising concentrations of  anthropogenically-emitted greenhouse gases in the Earth's  atmosphere are leading to changes in the climate. Scientific  observations on climate change were brought to policy-makers'  attention in the late 1970s. Scientific uncertainty was high, and  debate on whether or how to take action took place throughout the  1980s. By the end of the decade, though, the international  community had agreed that a global framework for action was  necessary to stabilize the atmospheric concentrations of  greenhouse gases in order to avoid 'dangerous anthropogenic  interference' with the climate system. Gases that were considered  important to control included methane, nitrous oxide and, in  particular, carbon dioxide. Negotiations on the UNFCCC began in  1991, and governments adopted it in June 1992. The UNFCCC entered  into force on 21 March 1994, and now has 189 Parties.

## TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER

Technology transfer is considered a key  element in combating climate change under the UNFCCC. Technology  transfer activities have been on the agenda of every session of  the SBSTA and the Conference of the Parties (COP). UNFCCC Article  4.5, which addresses the need for technology transfer, states that  'developed country Parties…shall take all practicable steps to  promote, facilitate and finance, as appropriate, the transfer of,  or access to, environmentally sound technologies and know-how to  other Parties, particularly developing country Parties, to enable  them to implement the provisions of the Convention,' adding that  'in this process, the developed country Parties shall support the  development and enhancement of endogenous capacities and  technologies of developing country Parties.' At the seventh Conference of the Parties (COP-7) held in November  2001 in Marrakesh, Morocco, delegates decided to establish an  Expert Group on Technology Transfer (EGTT) to support the work of  the SBSTA in advancing the Convention's technology-related goals.  During 2002-2003, the EGTT met several times, adopting a work  programme and providing input and advice to the SBSTA on  technology transfer. During that time, the EGTT considered a  variety of issues, focusing in particular on information  dissemination, enabling environments for the transfer of  environmentally-sound technologies, and technology needs  assessments. In this regard, UNFCCC workshops were held on  technology information (Beijing, China, April 2002), needs  assessments (Seoul, Republic of Korea, April 2002), and enabling  environments (Ghent, Belgium, April 2003).

In December 2003, the nineteenth session of SBSTA approved the  EGTT's programme of work for 2004. The programme included a new  request that the EGTT should begin to examine the matter of  innovative financing for the development and transfer of  technologies. SBSTA-19 also asked the UNFCCC Secretariat to  organize a workshop on the matter, and to report back on the  findings of the workshop at SBSTA-21 in December 2004. At its  twentieth session in June 2004, SBSTA provided further guidance on  how the workshop should be organized, recommending that it have a  practical focus and that it consider case studies from various  stakeholders using a range of technologies under varying situations  and circumstances.

# REPORT OF THE WORKSHOP

The workshop was opened on Monday morning, 27 September 2004, by  Margaret Martin (Canada), the Chair of the EGTT and the workshop.  Observing that this was the first formal opportunity under the  UNFCCC process to discuss innovative options for financing  technology development and transfer since the topic was added to  the EGTT's work programme in 2003, she indicated that the meeting  would focus on practical matters, including case studies and  experiences, good practices and obstacles to technology transfer.

Janos Pasztor, Coordinator of the UNFCCC Secretariat's Sustainable  Development Programme, highlighted the transfer of technology as a  key component in implementing the Convention. Noting that technology  transfer requires significant financial assistance but that there  had been a decline in official development assistance in recent  years, he observed that it was therefore timely to consider new and  innovative financing options. He explained that this workshop would  create a better understanding of the issue, allowing for an exchange  of experiences on good practices and dialogue with the financial  sector. It would also help narrow any differences and identify  possible next steps.

Elmer Holt, Vice Chair of the Climate Technology Initiative (CTI),  outlined the work of CTI, which was founded by a group of developed  countries and the European Commission in 1995. He explained that CTI  aimed to support the UNFCCC's technology objectives, and was actively  involved in promoting public-private sector partnerships, supporting  technology needs assessments under the Convention, and helping to  create enabling environments for the transfer of  environmentally-sound technologies.

Margaret McCuaig-Johnston, Assistant Deputy Minister of Energy  Technology and Programmes, Natural Resources Canada, gave the  keynote address of the opening segment. She observed that this  workshop marked the start of a process designed to build a solid  foundation to support innovative options for financing technology  transfer under the UNFCCC. Highlighting the need for transformative  and new technologies, she cautioned that existing, readily-available  technologies should not be overlooked. As an example, she cited an  initiative to promote energy efficient compact fluorescent light  bulbs. She also highlighted the challenges in bringing new  technologies to the market, drawing attention to the role commercial  demonstration projects can play. In this context, she stressed the  critical need for international cooperation and private-sector  partnerships. Noting that work on financing should be considered  within the broader context of technology transfer, she noted the  EGTT's excellent work in areas such as technology needs assessments  and the information exchange facilitated by the TT:CLEAR website  (http://ttclear.unfccc.int/).

# SESSION ONE

### SETTING THE SCENE

The workshop's first session, which took place on Monday, was  divided into two parts. The first part, held in the morning and  early afternoon, focused on providing background and context to  the issue, with briefings from the UNFCCC Secretariat and a  discussion on participants' expectations for the meeting. The  second portion took place in the afternoon, and involved several  presentations offering a general perspective on the issue from  representatives of the financial sector. This was followed by a  panel discussion.

### PART I - BACKGROUND

Presentations from the UNFCCC Secretariat:  Wanna Tanunchaiwatana, Manager of the UNFCCC's Technology  Subprogramme, outlined the workshop's background and context. She  noted that many developing countries have now conducted their  technology needs assessments, and that this workshop would help  identify financing options to support these needs. She then asked  developing country representatives to identify their specific  technology needs. Several responded, highlighting areas such as  energy efficiency, solar energy, adaptation, and biomass.  Tanunchaiwatana concluded by reviewing relevant provisions of the  Convention and existing financing opportunities. She said the  workshop's outcomes would be considered at SBSTA-21 in December 2004.

Daniele Violetti, Programme Officer, UNFCCC Secretariat, presented  on trends in financial flows for technology transfer. He noted  that financial flows to developing countries have declined since  1997, but increased again in 2002 and 2003, while foreign direct  investment is expected to increase in 2005. He drew attention to  the limited involvement of the private sector in financing  climate-related technology transfer, and highlighted the need to  bridge the gap between governments and the private sector.  Identifying the challenges facing the public sector, he emphasized  the need to provide adequate funding, create favorable market  conditions and raise awareness.

Paul van Aalst, UNFCCC Consultant, presented the Background  Information Paper prepared for this workshop  (http://ttclear.unfccc.int/ttclear/pdf/Workshops/Canada/Montreal%2 0background%20paper-edited.pdf). He highlighted the key  prerequisites for securing financing, including the need to add  value for stakeholders, demonstrate minimal risk and acceptable  returns, offer transparency, accountability and credibility, and  contribute to sustainable development. He reviewed some general  financing characteristics for both mitigation and adaptation  activities, and identified barriers to accessing financing at the  country, sectoral and project levels. He then listed the main  sources of financing, including multilateral and intergovernmental  organizations, country-based instruments, other financing models,  deal brokers and market facilitators. He also noted that additional  financing instruments were under construction, and concluded by  outlining some general guidelines for innovative financing, which  he said should take into account wider economic and development  goals, and include an effective policy framework.

###     Discussion on workshop expectations

Participants were then asked  to comment on their expectations for the workshop. One speaker said  he hoped it would lead to a better understanding of the issue, and  was interested in hearing case studies, new ideas for innovative  financing, and suggestions on next steps. A developing country  representative said he did not have high expectations, as the  process of technology transfer under the UNFCCC had not moved  quickly to date. He called for the process to be addressed with  far greater urgency, adding that discussions on the role of the  private sector should not be used as an excuse by industrialized  countries for not meeting their obligations under UNFCCC Article  4.5. An industrialized country representative said he hoped for a  meeting focused on what is possible, practical and achievable. He  looked forward to discussions involving financial 'intermediaries'  and the private sector, and noted a need to focus on small and  medium-sized enterprises. One developing country speaker said he  anticipated useful discussions on capacity building and on  barriers to technology transfer, while another expressed an  interest in learning where the financial resources would come  from, and what the priorities should be. A speaker from the  financial sector explained that investment decisions by the  private sector were based on an assessment of the likely rate  of return.

### PART II - GENERAL PERSPECTIVE FROM THE FINANCIAL SECTOR

On Monday  afternoon, the second part of the session began, chaired by EGTT  member Rawleston Moore (Barbados).

###     Presentations

George Sorenson, Chair of FE Clean Energy Group,  USA, made a presentation on renewable energy and energy efficiency  strategies. He explained that FE Clean Energy Group is a private  equity investment firm with US$150 million of investment capital,  and that it finances energy efficiency and renewable energy  projects worldwide. He indicated that for projects to receive  financing, the following elements must be in place: national  policies that support energy efficiency initiatives; financing  'enablers,' including some financing by local or government  institutions; financial guarantors; and a clear and efficient  licensing process for new projects.

Charles W. Donovan, Commercial Manager of Transactions, CAT  Alliance Ltd UK, spoke about private sector perspectives on risk.  He reviewed several private sector financing options with  different levels of risk, such as common equity, preferred equity,  'Mezzanine' debt that combines debt and equity, senior debt that  receives priority for repayment, and subordinated debt. He  indicated that private sector financing institutions demand  project evaluation that evaluates risks relating to the exchange  rate, political situation, environmental compliance, technology  type, operational activities, construction, counterparty credit  and commodity price. He also provided an overview of the credit  risk management process, including the screening of  counterparties, development of trading limits and transaction  limit processes, monitoring and reporting of financial exposure  against limits, testing of exposure to financial losses on  individual transactions, and development of credit-support  packages that facilitate the efficient allocation of credit risk  for multiple transactions.

Martin Whittaker, Senior Vice President, Swiss Re Financial  Services, spoke about commercializing his company's commitment to  sustainability through innovative financing options. He outlined  two specific projects his company is involved in. The first is the  'Footprint Neutral' initiative being developed in partnership with  the Nature Conservancy, Conservation International, and the UN  Development Programme. The initiative will create a voluntary  scheme allowing companies to buy into projects that will offset  their carbon emissions and other environmental impacts. The second  project is a European renewable energy and energy efficiency  equity fund targeting returns of 15-25 percent. The fund will  focus on Central and Eastern Europe with the aim of generating and  selling carbon offsets to boost investment returns.

###     Question-and-answer session

In the ensuing discussion, one  participant raised concerns that banks were willing to fund a  range of projects, but that in some cases insurers were not  willing to provide the necessary performance guarantees on the  investment because of a lack of certainty on the returns,  particularly in terms of the value of the carbon that might be  offset by the project, and the risk involved. Martin Whittaker  responded that insurers did not have the underwriting capacity and  expertise in some areas, but would respond should a critical mass  of demand for insurance develop in a particular area, such as  geothermal or wind power.

Several government representatives asked how governments could  support private sector involvement. George Sorenson replied that  governments should ensure greater predictability in terms of  financial returns. For instance, he considered the rules governing  'additionality' under the Kyoto Protocol's Clean Development  Mechanism (CDM) to be unhelpful because they provided no clarity  on what the final value of the carbon might be. Whittaker said  governments should create an attractive environment for investment  to take place, and could help underwrite and remove risk where the  private sector lacks data or information.

Several participants noted the different 'languages' and concepts  being used by representatives of governments compared with those  from the private sector, and said ongoing contact and  communication between the two groups would be extremely valuable.

###     Panel discussion

Following the presentations and question-and- answer session, participants engaged in a panel discussion  involving briefings from five invited speakers. This was followed  by an exchange of views on financing issues.

Raymond Wright, Group Managing Director for the Petroleum  Corporation of Jamaica, spoke on financing and renewable energy  markets in Jamaica. He stressed the need for government guarantees  in financing renewable energy projects, as well as the need to  tackle issues relating to taxation, risk sharing, capital  availability, and legal and policy frameworks. He observed that  foreign investment in renewable energy projects will promote risk  sharing and access to international markets, and will enhance  local private sector participation.

Christine Woerlen, Global Environment Facility (GEF), highlighted  governments' role in promoting international financing for  technology transfer projects by identifying priority areas,  setting out framework conditions for transactions, shaping the  financial flows, enhancing national capacities, and providing  adequate information to investors.

Kok Seng Yap, Deputy Director-General of the Malaysian  Meteorological Service, said that in order to support financing  for technology transfer, countries should disseminate information  on their successes and enhance capacity building for project  implementation. He urged workshop participants to take into  consideration the technology needs assessments conducted in many  countries and to identify ways to meet these needs.

Alan Miller, International Finance Corporation, spoke on financing  technology transfer through commercial lending. He noted obstacles  to commercial lending for technology transfer, including  unacceptable investment risks, significant policy barriers, low or  no returns on the investment, and excessive transaction costs.

Eric Usher, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), considered  three major areas he said needed to be enhanced in order to promote  financing for technology transfer: information transfer; networks  among financial institutions, investors, and countries in need of  technologies; and partnerships among the various actors involved in  financing transactions. He recommended that national governments  improve the enabling environment so as to attract financing.

Following the panel presentations, a number of participants  responded with comments and questions. A civil society speaker  briefed participants on a technology transfer workshop held  recently in Tokyo attended by government officials and industry  representatives. He noted comments during the meeting that  competition is critical, citing as an example the popularity of  the Toyota Prius hybrid car in encouraging other automakers to  enter the hybrid car market. He also highlighted the issue of  intellectual property rights, noting that opportunities for  technological leapfrogging were being hampered by concerns over  loss of profits if these rights were given away.

On the issue of project financing, one participant stressed that  it was available for 'good' projects, but that most projects were  seen as 'bad' by the international finance sector because those in  developing countries who were submitting project proposals did not  have sufficient experience in document preparation, and did not  'speak the language of the financial institutions.'

### OVERVIEW OF DAY ONE

On Tuesday morning, participants heard an  overview of the first day's presentations and discussions. Workshop  Chair Margaret Martin noted participants' expectations that the  workshop should share information on case studies, good practices,  and barriers to financing. She acknowledged some disappointment in  progress on technology transfer to date, as well as the need to  provide enabling environments and reduce investment risk. She drew  attention to comments about adaptation activities and the view that  adaptation and mitigation activities are not mutually exclusive.  She noted speeches emphasizing that insurance companies are paying  greater attention to climate change as a result of increased risk,  while observing that not all risks are quantifiable. She also  highlighted comments that environmentally-sound technologies should  be in the public domain, and that a lot of 'good' money is available  but that there are more 'bad' or poorly-prepared projects than  'good' ones. Finally, she noted discussions on the need for a policy  framework that is 'loud, long and legal,' meaning that governments  provide clear signals to the market that the renewable energy sector  is supported by stable, effective and transparent rules that  encourage investment.

EGTT member Rawleston Moore, who had chaired the afternoon portion  of the day's discussions, added his reflections on the session. He  highlighted participants' comments on the importance of mobilizing  domestic capital, the value of foreign investment, the need to  overcome the barrier of inadequate information available to  potential investors, the benefits of public-private partnerships,  and the role of donor financing.

# SESSION TWO

### CURRENT PRACTICE AND LESSONS LEARNED

The workshop's second session, which was held on Tuesday, 28  September, consisted of two segments. The first focused on  'development finance in practice,' with four speakers providing  insights and case studies on the subject. This was followed by a  question-and-answer period. The second part of the session  examined barriers and lessons learned in relation to financing,  focusing in particular on case studies from Ghana and China.

### PART I - DEVELOPMENT FINANCE IN PRACTICE

Presentations: EGTT  member Elmer Holt (US), who chaired the first part of the session,  introduced the topic by drawing attention to the commercial  realities of development finance. He observed that, where risk is  high and returns are ill-defined, little can be expected. Meanwhile,  at the other end of the spectrum, projects offering low risks and  predictable returns are generating a lot of interest and activity.  The focus of this discussion, he said, would be those projects that  fall in between these extremes.

Peter Storey, Vice President of Financing, HERA International  Group, spoke about private sector development and financing of  technology-related projects, focusing on his experiences in  sub-Saharan Africa. Storey examined the project development cycle,  stressing the need for a thorough pre-development stage that  carefully examines the feasibility of the project. As  pre-development costs can amount to as much as 2% of total  project costs with no guarantee of success, he advocated developing  a consortium of interested parties to spread the risk. He then  reviewed a case study, the Zambezi Valley Development Scheme,  reflecting on its successes, failures, and lessons learned. He  recommended an integrated approach to projects that engages both  public and private sectors, and said governments must create a  stable legislative and regulatory environment.

Peter Rossbach, Director, Impax Capital Ltd, spoke about Impax's  Patient Capital Initiative and equity finance for renewable energy  in emerging markets. He described the Initiative as a 'one-stop  shop' with co-funding for local/regional sub-funds, as well as  funding for carbon credit purchases and technical assistance. He  highlighted lessons learned and identified various prerequisites  for developing successful renewable energy activities, including  appropriate government regulations and project debt, and  acceptable returns. He also suggested ways of making projects  financially viable in the market, including supporting the  development of long-term market forces, the establishment of  policies and regulations that encourage investment, as well as  private funding and official development assistance accompanied by  country co-financing.

Patrick Daddario, President of the Fiorello H. LaGuardia Foundation,  spoke about how to engage local financial institutions in project  development and implementation. He explained that, since its  establishment in 2001, the Foundation has carried out projects in  Brazil, China and India aimed at catalyzing human, institutional  and financial resources to support the development of  locally-defined and managed enterprises engaging in sustainable  energy activities. He stated that utilizing local resources and  maintaining environmental, social and financial sustainability are  critical to developing and implementing projects. Asserting that  local financial institutions have the ability and capacity to  participate, he cautioned that projects were unlikely to succeed  without their involvement.

Youba Sokona, Executive Secretary of the Sahara and Sahel  Observatory, spoke about the approach of the African Rural Energy  Enterprise Development (AREED) initiative to public-private  partnerships. He listed various challenges in the African context,  including the need to improve people's access to energy services,  support a self-sustaining 'scale-up' of energy systems, and create  or stimulate markets. Stressing that no one solution fits all  circumstances and that no one actor can operate in a vacuum, he  called for a cooperative approach focused on connecting multiple  partnerships that add value in the areas of financing, programme  development, implementation, enterprise, and service delivery. He  hoped that the current focus on projects would shift towards  discussions on the creation of 'portfolios' and ultimately to  'systems' of self-supporting products and services.

###     Question-and-answer session

In the discussion that followed, one  participant sought clarification on the suggestion that projects  could involve an unbiased 'integrator' or consultant to help  facilitate them. In response, Peter Storey explained that this  agent can provide credibility and avoid any conflict of interest  by remaining independent of the government and the development  consortium, while also having a commitment to the project.

A developing country participant argued for minimizing the costs  involved in a project's pre-development phase, as high costs  represent a risk in itself. He also raised the issue of 'bundling'  sustainable energy projects at the national or regional level,  which can help reduce overall project development costs. In  response, Patrick Daddario said project bundling offered  efficiencies and the potential to develop ongoing expertise that  would lead to lower transaction costs.

One UN expert said donors should consider shifting away from  grant-based technology demonstration projects towards providing  seed capital. He supported seed capital as a donor mechanism that  could be used to support small and medium-sized enterprises and  lead to ongoing activities that could ultimately pull in commercial  capital and lead to sustainable businesses. He referred to this as  a 'blended' approach that involves both donor and private financing.

### PART II

BARRIERS AND LESSONS LEARNED: During the second portion  of the session, delegates heard two case studies examining  barriers and lessons learned in Ghana and China.

William Kojo Agyemang-Bonsu of Ghana's Environmental Protection  Agency reflected on his country's experiences, stressing that it  is imperative to move from negotiations to implementation in terms  of technology transfer. He explained that Ghana had conducted a  thorough technology needs assessment in order to start the  implementation process. The assessment contains a technology  implementation plan, identifies barriers to technology transfer,  suggests actions to remove such barriers, identifies the  stakeholders to be involved, and prioritizes key technologies. He  said that the weakest link in the implementation process is the  mechanism for technology transfer, including the financial  mechanism. He also noted that technology transfer should not be  based on a formula but should be an innovative process that  includes the concept of learning by doing. He then presented a  case study on the promotion of biomass energy, which requires  financing for technology transfer.

Ji Zou, Professor at Renmin University in China, offered a Chinese  perspective on financing the development and transfer of  technologies. He argued that effective technology transfer under  the UNFCCC would require developed countries to meet their  obligations under the Convention. He also identified a need to  fill the gap between the high price set by the private sector for  technology transfer and the weak purchasing power of developing  countries. In reviewing practical strategies for achieving  technology transfer, he stressed that financing should bring a  range of benefits, such as poverty alleviation, local environmental  improvement, the creation of jobs and improved infrastructure,  consistent policies and plans, and information sharing. He referred  to a project in Inner Mongolia to demonstrate the importance of  combining different financial resources in implementing technology  transfer.

# SESSION THREE

### ONGOING INITIATIVES FOR INNOVATIVE FINANCING

On Tuesday afternoon, 28 September, participants considered ongoing  initiatives for innovative financing. The session, which was  chaired by EGTT member William Agyemang-Bonsu (Ghana), began with  three presentations from financial sector representatives focusing  on venture capitalism, emerging markets, and export credit agencies.  This was followed by a question-and-answer session and an interactive  discussion on key issues and linkages.

### INNOVATIVE FINANCING OPTIONS

Presentations: Nicholas Parker, Chair  of Cleantech Venture Network LLC, spoke about trends in clean energy  venture financing. He noted a growing interest among venture  capitalists and others in clean energy, with US$3 billion invested  in recent years in new technologies, mostly in North America and  Europe. On opportunities in developing countries, he differentiated  between big economies like China, which he said had huge potential  for leapfrogging that should be driven by the private sector, and  smaller developing countries, which he said need capacity building  and training. He observed that work on renewable energy is already  happening on a huge scale in China and elsewhere.

Frank Joshua, CEO of the Climate Investment Partnership, discussed  opportunities and approaches in financing renewable energy in  emerging markets. He noted that emerging markets offer significant  opportunities for renewable energy projects, citing the case of  China, which is reportedly planning to spend US$120 billion to  double energy capacity by 2010. From an investor's perspective, he  stressed that what drives the market is the risk-adjusted rate of  return. One problem with developing countries is that there is no  easy 'exit strategy' that would allow investors to benefit from  their investment. He explained that, in industrialized countries,  an investment in wind power, for instance, would offer strong  profit potential, as the initial investor could sell the business  as a going concern after several years through an initial public  offering (IPO) on the stock market. This type of exit strategy  needs to become feasible in developing countries, too. Joshua also  raised concerns about monetizing carbon credits, noting that the  market and prices need to be more stable and certain for carbon  considerations to have an impact on decisions about project  viability. Highlighting that investment institutions are generally  interested only in large projects, he suggested bundling as an  option for smaller projects.

John Balint, International Financial Consulting Ltd, discussed the  relevance of export credit agencies (ECAs), which facilitate trade  by insuring against political and commercial risks, and which also  provide some investment insurance and direct lending. Noting the  significant role played by ECAs in some areas, he pointed out that  less than 1% of their exposure is in the areas of renewable energy  and energy efficiency. However, greater involvement could be  encouraged if governments and other shareholders give ECAs clear  instructions that encourage this. He noted that the fourth UNEP  ECA annual environmental workshop would be held shortly and would  discuss international guidelines for ECAs.

###     Question-and-answer session

In the ensuing discussion, a UN  agency representative said it is important to lobby government  finance ministries/departments on the importance of climate  change, as they can influence the private sector in terms of where  financial resources flow. John Balint said ECAs need to present  successful examples of their work to demonstrate to governments  the need for their greater involvement in renewable energy and  energy efficiency. Responding to a question about financing  options, Nicholas Parker said they would differ in each case  depending on the specific market conditions, including market size  and the project timeframe.

###     Interactive discussion on issues and linkages

Late on Tuesday  afternoon, participants engaged in an interactive discussion on  the issues raised during the session, and on the linkages and  connections between these issues. Many participants expressed  general satisfaction with the discussions and proposed continuing  the dialogue between governments and the financial sector. One  civil society representative said it is critical to establish a  'common language' for such dialogue. He also stressed the need to  integrate discussions on technology transfer financing with the  CDM process. One financial sector speaker expressed his confidence  that the financial market will be increasingly active in the area  of climate change and urged governments to help set the stage for  further financing, while a developing country representative  argued that the stage has already been set and that it is time to  move the process forward.

Noting that many developing countries have now assessed their  technology needs, a developing country participant said it is time  to identify how to meet these needs by establishing action plans.  Another developing country representative said technology transfer  has to adopt a sector-by-sector approach. Several non-Annex I  Party representatives also expressed their disappointment with the  limited progress in technology transfer in the context of the  UNFCCC. One called on developing countries and the private sector  to work together to develop projects, and another suggested that  more attention be given to mitigation and adaptation activities  that are crucial to developing countries.

Several participants raised the issue of how to bring the unit  costs of renewable energy down to the level of 'old technologies'  used to generate electricity from coal and other fossil fuels. One  private sector participant responded that governments could factor  in the actual costs of fossil fuel use, such as the impact of  pollution on human health and the health care system. Replying to  a comment on adaptation activities, Frank Joshua said participants  from the financial sector attending this workshop knew about  financing for mitigation rather than adaptation activities. He  suggested that it could be useful to hold a separate event on  financing adaptation activities.

Participants also discussed what governments can do to catalyze  financing, with Frank Joshua recommending that they could reduce  the risks for investors by funding the development of an effective  risk assessment model that the private sector could then apply to  projects. He also urged governments to put in place appropriate  regulatory frameworks.

### OVERVIEW OF DAY TWO

On Wednesday morning, delegates were presented  with a brief wrap-up of the second day of the workshop. Elmer Holt,  who had chaired session two, highlighted comments that financing is  not a 'bolt on' element to be added at the end of a process, but  needs to be secured early on. He noted participants' statements  that the externalities associated with fossil fuels must be  incorporated into their price if renewable energy financing is to  become more viable. He also drew attention to participants' comments  on the need to:mobilize local resources and build capacity to help create  local entrepreneurs; develop training programmes to educate local banks and other  institutions on financing technology transfer; establish the necessary infrastructure to support technology  transfer; and develop appropriate regulatory environments, such as Germany's  creation of a favorable framework for wind power.

Reflecting on the presentations and discussions during the third  session on Tuesday afternoon, William Agyemang-Bonsu, who had chaired  this session, drew attention to the major opportunities for renewable  energy investments in emerging markets, and investors' growing  interest in nergy projects. He highlighted comments on the value of  seed financing from governments, the important role of technology  needs assessments and enabling environments in helping leverage funds  for technology transfer, and the benefits of 'bundling' replicable,  high-quality projects so as to make them more commercially attractive.  He also noted statements on the need to develop risk assessment models  and to structure projects from a technical, financial and risk  perspective so as to increase access to 'project debt and equity.'  Finally, he drew attention to discussions on the importance of  identifying project synergies that would link climate technologies  with development issues such as water management and poverty.

# SESSION FOUR

### OUTCOMES AND POSSIBLE WAYS FORWARD

The final session of the workshop took place on Wednesday morning,  29 September. The session focused on outcomes and ways forward,  with deliberations taking place in a roundtable discussion moderated  by EGTT member Bernard Mazijn (Belgium). Reflecting on the past two  days' discussions, Mazijn reminded participants of the goals  established for the workshop, which included fostering a better  understanding of financing issues, sharing experiences and lessons  learned, narrowing differences and generating new ideas. He noted  that there had been significant progress in participants'  understanding of financing and that public and private sector  representatives had started to speak a 'common language.' He also  observed that, while some of the financing options discussed at  this meeting were not necessarily innovative in the financial  world, they were new within the context of the UNFCCC.

Outlining some next steps for the coming weeks and months, Daniele  Violetti of the UNFCCC Secretariat indicated that a report would  be prepared ahead of COP-10/SBSTA-21 in December 2004, and that a  two-hour side event would take place at COP-10 on the issues  raised by this workshop.

### ROUNDTABLE DISCUSSION

Participants then engaged in a roundtable  debate on the way forward on issues raised at this workshop. An  Annex I Party representative said he had been very encouraged by  the discussions, and felt that some useful proposals and models  had been outlined that could be replicated elsewhere. He felt that  although progress had been made, 'we are still speaking several  different languages,' and suggested that an ongoing dialogue was  needed. He proposed that the next meeting could perhaps be held in  a developing country and also include private sector experts from  developing countries, perhaps with more of a focus on adaptation.  A number of other participants supported an ongoing dialogue with  the private sector, and one industrialized country speaker  suggested engaging with both public and private sector financial  institutions, and small and medium enterprises. However, while  several speakers seemed to favor discussions on adaptation, one  speaker preferred a focus on renewable energy and energy  efficiency at this stage, focusing on adaptation later.

Several developing country participants stressed that UNFCCC  Article 4.5 was the foundation of this process and said that  further clarification of the article's meaning would be helpful.  One said the best way to move ahead was to focus on public-private  partnerships in the context of Article 4.5, while another speaker  said it was clear that developing countries needed assistance in  preparing projects to make them more attractive to investors.

In suggesting a way forward, some said future discussions should  consider both mitigation and adaptation activities, government  roles, the financial resources available in the public domain, and  how to remove barriers in both developed and developing countries.  Others encouraged the UNFCCC to interact with its sister conventions  in the context of technology transfer in order to learn from their  experiences. They emphasized that developing countries should  continue to improve enabling environments for financing technology  transfer and develop more demonstration projects. One participant  suggested forwarding text for a draft decision to SBSTA-21/COP-10  on the promotion of carbon trading in relation to technology  transfer based on the discussions at this workshop. He also  suggested holding further discussions in 2005 and urged the  private sector to provide financial support for this. A participant  from the private sector urged developing country participants to  understand ECAs in their countries and to lobby ministries of  finance to support ECAs' involvement in financing technology  transfer.

One participant from an industrialized country proposed  strengthening the analytical basis for work on Article 4.5. Noting  that COP-10 was to be held in Buenos Aires, he quoted the old  adage that 'it takes two to tango, and one to lead,' stressing  that while the private sector's interest is clear, the public  sector must push this process forward.

A developing country speaker highlighted the role of the CDM in  technology transfer. Noting that governments are often more focused  on regulations than on single projects, he drew attention to the  option of a project development fund, especially as the GEF process  can be quite time-consuming. He also recommended further thinking  on adaptation issues. Another developing country speaker said  technology needs assessments should form the basis for the  development of strategic plans to move the process forward.  However, he noted that this would require donor support.

Wrapping up the roundtable, Bernard Mazijn noted comments on the  need to consider adaptation in more detail. On the issue of tools  and models, he said it seemed appropriate to develop a list of  existing tools and models, and identify those that are missing. He  also noted some comments on whether some sort of toolkit, handbook  or guidelines would be helpful. He identified calls for an ongoing  dialogue with the private sector, and comments on linking the  UNFCCC's work into wider processes.

Participants supported Mazijn's overview, although one speaker  noted that there had been some uncertainty in discussions over the  value of further guidelines. Several speakers endorsed building on  the work that has already been undertaken and using the existing  tools, including the technology needs assessments. One participant  added a suggestion to recommend to SBSTA the use of existing models  and approaches that have been successful in this area, and another  added that the EGTT can put 'flesh on the bones' of these ideas.

# CLOSING REMARKS

In her closing comments, workshop Chair Margaret Martin thanked  participants for their openness, concluding that it had been a  very productive two-and-a-half days. She detected a willingness to  move forward, particularly in the area of public-private  partnerships. She thanked the organizers, including the UNFCCC  Secretariat and her Canadian colleagues, as well as EGTT members,  session chairs, and all the participants, expressing her gratitude  to them for 'putting the word ‘work' into this workshop.' In  particular, she thanked fellow EGTT members Thomas Verheye of the  European Commission and Elmer Holt of the US for their efforts in  making this workshop a success. She also expressed her gratitude  to representatives of the private sector for making themselves  available for this event.

Wanna Tanunchaiwatana, UNFCCC Secretariat, thanked Margaret Martin  for chairing the meeting so effectively and Canada for its  hospitality. She indicated that the Secretariat was extremely  pleased with the outcome of this workshop, and informed  participants that the report of the workshop would be made  available ahead of COP-10. She hoped for further progress on this  issue at COP-10/SBSTA-21, and noted that ministers will be  discussing technology issues during the high-level segment. She  also expressed her appreciation to the donors for funding this  event. The meeting concluded at 12:30 pm.

# UPCOMING MEETINGS

### WORKSHOP ON TRANSPORTATION AND CLIMATE CHANGE

This workshop will  be held from 12-13 October 2004, in Baltimore, Maryland, US.  Organized by the International Petroleum Industry Environmental  Conservation Association (IPIECA), this event will bring together  experts from academia, government, business, intergovernmental and  non-governmental organizations to discuss the future of  transportation against the backdrop of global climate change. The  workshop will consider regional and global trends, new  technologies for vehicles and fuels, air and marine transport, and  near-term measures that could contribute to longer-term strategies  on climate change. For more information, contact: Tim Stileman,  IPIECA; tel: +44-20-7633-2388; fax: +44-20-7633-2389; e-mail:  tim.stileman@ipieca.org; Internet:  http://www.ipieca.org/climate/climate_news.html

### CDM EXECUTIVE BOARD MEETINGS 2004

The Executive Board of the  Kyoto Protocol's Clean Development Mechanism is scheduled to hold  its sixteenth session from 21-22 October 2004, in Bonn, Germany.  Its seventeenth session is scheduled for 1-3 December 2004, in  Buenos Aires, immediately prior to the tenth Conference of the  Parties of the UNFCCC. For more information, contact: UNFCCC  Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815-1005; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail:  cdm-info@unfccc.int; Internet: http://cdm.unfccc.int

### UN SYMPOSIUM ON HYDROPOWER AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

This  United Nations Symposium will be held from 27-29 October 2004, in  Beijing, China. Organized by DESA/DSD, the World Bank, and the  Government of China, this meeting will focus on a variety of  issues, including: the strategic importance of hydropower for  sustainable development; benefits and concerns regarding existing  dams and hydropower facilities; and principles and processes for  hydropower development. For more information, contact: Kui-Nang  Mak, Chief, Energy & Transport Branch, UN DSD/DESA; tel: +1-212- 963-8797; fax: +1-212-963-4340; e-mail: makk@un.org; Internet:  http://unhsd.icold-cigb.org.cn/english.html

### CLIMATE CHANGE AND BUSINESS CONFERENCE AND EXPO 2004

This  international conference is scheduled for 3-5 November 2004, in  Auckland, New Zealand. The conference will consider the linkages  between business and climate change. Based on the assumption that  'climate change is big business and will remain so whether or not  the Kyoto Protocol enters into force,' the meeting will include  discussions on business opportunities and on improving companies'  bottom line performance by reducing energy costs and emissions.  The conference is supported by the Australian and New Zealand  governments, and is co-organized by business and union groups, as  well as the Pew Center on Global Climate Change. For more  information, contact: The Conference Company, Ltd; tel: +64-9-360- 1240; fax: +64-9-360-1242; e-mail:  secretariat@climateandbusiness.com; Internet:  http://www.climateandbusiness.com

### 22ND SESSION OF THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

The  IPCC's 22nd session will be held in New Delhi, India, from 9-11  November 2004. The IPCC is now working on its fourth assessment  report. For more information, contact: IPCC Secretariat; tel: +41- 22-730-8208; fax: +41-22-730-8025; e-mail: IPCC-Sec@wmo.int;  Internet: http://www.ipcc.ch/calendar.htm

### EMA EMERGING MARKETS CONFERENCE

EMISSIONS & RENEWABLES: The  Emissions Marketing Association's conference on emissions and  renewable energy in emerging markets will be held in Houston,  Texas, US, from 14-17 November 2004. For more information,  contact: David Feldner, EMA Executive Director; tel: +1-414-276- 3819; fax: +1-414-276-3349; e-mail: dfeldner@emissions.org;  Internet: http://www.emissions.org/conferences/houston04/

### WORLD CONFERENCE ON ENERGY FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT - TECHNOLOGY  ADVANCES AND ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES

This international conference  will take place in Cairo, Egypt, from 6-9 December 2004. It will  seek to provide a forum for discussions between energy experts,  technology users and manufacturers/suppliers, decision makers and  planners, and interested business for the near-term deployment of  sustainable energy technologies and concepts, particularly in  relation to the Middle East. The event is being organized by the  National Renewable Energy Laboratory and the Arab Academy for  Science and Technology and Maritime Transport. For more  information, contact: Fuad Abulfotuh, Arab Academy; e-mail:  mceet@link.net; Internet: http://www.aast.edu/mceet/confindex.htm

### WORLD CONFERENCE ON ENERGY FOR DEVELOPMENT

This meeting will take  place in Noordwuk, the Netherlands, from 12-14 December 2004. The  conference is based on the premise that energy is the key to  economic development, poverty reduction and environmental  sustainability, and that huge investments are needed in the Third  World to develop energy systems in a way that contributes towards  sustainable development. The conference will consider investment  needs in the energy sector, obstacles and solutions. It is being  hosted by the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry  of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment, with support  from the World Bank, UNDP and the World Business Council on  Sustainable Development. For more information, contact:  Secretariat, tel: +31-70-339-1812; fax: +31-70-339-1306; e-mail:  projectteam@energyfordevelopment.org; Internet:  http://www.energyfordevelopment.org

### TENTH CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE UNFCCC

The tenth Conference  of the Parties (COP-10) to the UN Framework Convention on Climate  Change (UNFCCC) will convene in Buenos Aires, Argentina, from 6-17  December 2004. COP-10 will resume negotiations relating to the  Convention and the Kyoto Protocol. It will occur alongside the  twenty-first sessions of the subsidiary bodies (SB-21). On the  issue of technology transfer, a two-hour side event is being  planned at SB-21/COP-10 on the topics raised by this workshop. The  side event is tentatively scheduled for Wednesday, 8 December,  from 6:00-8:00 pm. For more information, contact: UNFCCC  Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail:  secretariat@unfccc.int; Internet: http://www.unfccc.int