---
title: "HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE FCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES MEETINGS, SATURDAY, 5 JUNE 1999"
id: enb12105e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12105e
date: 1999-06-05
abstract: "The Joint Working Group on compliance met in the afternoon.  Contact groups were convened on: the Protocol mechanisms; land  use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF); Annex I  communications; and non-Annex I communications. An informal  consultation on activities implemented jointly (AIJ) was held."
---

# JOINT WORKING GROUP ON COMPLIANCE

The G-77/CHINA identified elements relevant to procedures and  mechanisms relating to compliance under the Kyoto Protocol. She  noted that the principle of common but differentiated  responsibility is regarded as the cornerstone in the design and  implementation of the compliance regime. Aspects to be considered  in the development of a compliance regime include the need for,  inter alia: the elaboration of relevant principles; modalities  and guidelines for verification, reporting and accountability  under the Protocol's mechanisms; the potential application to the  Protocol of any multilateral consultative process (MCP) adopted  under the Convention; and a critical evaluation of the Convention  and the Protocol's financial mechanism as a means of assessing  both the obligations of Annex I Parties and the adequacy of the  mechanism in assisting non-Annex I Parties to comply with the  Protocol.

The G-77/CHINA also stated that only Parties that are in  compliance with their obligations and are bound by a compliance  regime should be allowed to participate in the Protocol  mechanisms. Binding consequences for non-compliance are  essential, as they will enhance the Parties' collective ability  to deter non-compliance. She said it may be desirable to identify  cases and/or activities that may constitute non-compliance. She  supported an indicative list of non-compliance consequences,  depending on the cause, type, degree and frequency of non- compliance, including:* appropriate assistance, including technical and financial  expertise and capacity building; * issuing cautions; * suspension of rights, including the ability to participate  in Article 6 (joint implementation), 12 (clean development  mechanism) and 17 (emissions trading); and, * penalties, including financial penalties for Annex B  Parties.

She said financial penalties resulting from a non-compliance  procedure should be made available to meet the cost of  adaptation. If necessary, an appropriate institution or body may  be required. Such an institution should be based on the principle  of equitable geographic distribution. The G-77/CHINA also  circulated a list of questions on a compliance system, including:  what should be the principles that guide the development of  procedures to implement Article 18 (non-compliance) of the  Protocol and what procedures and mechanisms under Article 18  entail binding consequences. The questions also focus on specific  provisions of the Protocol that may require binding consequences  and raise issues with regard to the expert review teams  contemplated in Protocol Article 8 (review of information).

JAPAN, the US and AUSTRALIA said the proposal would form a useful  basis for beginning a dialogue, and expressed their intention to  raise questions at the working group's next meeting. The CENTER  FOR INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL LAW proposed a 'compliance fund.'  If Parties reach the end of a commitment period and find that  their emissions, minus removals, exceed their assigned amount,  they would be obligated under the Protocol to purchase credits or  parts of assigned amount (PAA) to cover their overage. However,  if there are insufficient credits or PAA available from the  market, they would have to purchase the required credits from  the compliance fund, which would invest the money in the highest  quality emission reduction and removal projects.

Following a discussion on ways to proceed, Co-Chair Rønneberg  invited delegations to submit additional questions. These, along  with the G-77/China's and the Secretariat's list of questions,  will be compiled into a revised list. These questions and a draft  work programme will be considered on Tuesday.

# CONTACT GROUPS AND INFORMAL CONSULTATIONS

### Mechanisms:

The contact group on the Protocol mechanisms  adjourned its meeting until Monday afternoon to allow the  regional groups to finish their deliberations.

### LULUCF

The LULUCF contact group met in the afternoon to consider  draft conclusions on relevant policy and procedural issues.  Delegates considered three flow charts tabled by Australia on  behalf of several Parties, and one tabled by the EU. The charts  outlined processes to advance LULUCF-related issues with the aim  of helping facilitate agreement on the draft conclusions.  Participants exchanged ideas on how to incorporate the four  charts into one. Suggestions for issues to be included in the  chart included, inter alia: requesting IPCC to develop a work  plan to address methodological issues on LULUCF for Convention  reporting; elaborating at SBSTA-10 the intent behind the sentence  in Protocol Article 3.4 (other land use activities) that calls on  Annex I Parties to provide data to establish 1990 carbon stock  levels prior to COP/MOP-I; requesting Parties to make submissions  on wood products; inviting submissions from Parties on draft text  on modalities rules and guidelines for LULUCF at COP-5; and  holding a workshop or special event at COP-5 on the draft IPCC  Special Report on LULUCF, as well as a workshop prior to COP-6 to  consider the published IPCC report.

AUSTRALIA noted that the group's consideration of the charts had  clarified issues and would help advance negotiations. He  suggested that it had moved the discussion beyond the current  draft conclusions. With CANADA and NEW ZEALAND, he suggested  incorporating these new ideas into revised draft conclusions. The  G-77/CHINA expressed concern at the charts, which look beyond  COP-5, and said the Secretariat should not be instructed to  incorporate ideas from the charts into the draft guidelines. He  suggested resuming discussion on the current draft guidelines.  The group agreed that Parties could make additional submissions  that will be incorporated into the current draft guidelines to  reflect ideas emerging from the contact group's discussions.

### Annex I Communications:

The contact group on Annex I  communications continued its consideration of the draft common  reporting format tables and began discussing draft conclusions on  Protocol Articles 5 (methodology), 7 (communications) and 8  (review of information). The group also considered whether  reporting of total emissions should include emissions and  removals from LULUCF.

### Non-Annex I Communications:

The non-Annex I communications  contact group met in a morning session to hear presentations on  enabling activities and capacity building by the Secretariat, the  GEF and UNEP. The group discussed a G-77/China proposed draft  decision on initial and subsequent non-Annex I communications.  The Secretariat referred to COP decisions on guidelines for the  preparation of communications by non-Annex I Parties and noted  that the Secretariat was mandated to provide assistance to  Parties through the preparation of regional workshops and fora.  The PHILIPPINES said enabling activities went beyond capacity  building and highlighted the importance of identifying  difficulties faced by non-Annex I countries such as the lack of  financial resources and technology to, inter alia, gather data  for national communications. UGANDA and LAOS pointed to the need  for capacity building on GEF procedures, including for the  implementing agencies in the field. The EU emphasized the value  of adequate information for the quality of communications.  GEORGIA suggested that CDM activities be a component of second  non-Annex I communications and called for capacity building to  achieve this.

The GEF referred to seven projects on capacity building and  enabling activities, including regional workshops, and presented  a chart summarizing countries' views in Africa and Latin America  on difficulties in preparing elements of national communications  and rating the usefulness of assistance received. He noted that  most countries encountered difficulties regarding adaptation  measures and abatement analysis. UGANDA, with CHINA and  ARGENTINA, indicated that national communications were a  continuous process and emphasized the need for ongoing assistance  for data collection. BARBADOS referred to vulnerability as one of  the main components of non-Annex I communications and pointed to  difficulties in obtaining financial assistance. MEXICO noted its  satisfaction with UNDP regional workshops on communications. TOGO  called for workshops tailored to the specific needs and  circumstances of individual countries. ARGENTINA emphasized that  experts' qualifications are essential to the workshops' success.

UNEP made a presentation on a National Communications Support  Programme (NCSP) and said the projects' aim is to improve the  quality, comprehensiveness, and timeliness of non-Annex I  Parties' initial communications through the operation of a 'help  desk' and through thematic and regional exchange workshops. He  said the purpose of the 'help desk' was to provide additional  technical assistance to countries preparing national  communications. ARGENTINA asked for information on workshops in  Latin America. The PHILIPPINES sought clarification on the  meaning of 'timeliness' of non-Annex I Parties' communications as  an objective. BARBADOS pointed to difficulties in attending the  workshops given that no financial assistance for participation  was provided. The EUROPEAN COMMISSION proposed including project  beneficiaries in the NCSP's steering committee to enhance its  effectiveness.

Participants considered a draft decision tabled by the G-77/China  on initial and subsequent non-Annex I communications. The  discussion focused on a provision establishing a non-Annex I  Group of Experts, with a view to enhancing support for  preparation of communications, identifying difficulties faced by  countries and improving non-Annex I communications. The US  inquired how the expert group would feed back into national  processes and cautioned against duplication of work. The EU  expressed interest in the proposal and asked about its linkage to  intergovernmental processes. The group decided to reconvene  during the week to continue its discussions and further consider  the G-77/China's proposed draft decision.

### AIJ

Informal consultations chaired by Margaret Mukahanana  (Zimbabwe) and Jos Delbeke (European Community) were held on the  draft conclusions of the SBI and SBSTA Chairs on the AIJ pilot  phase. Discussions focused on elements for the review of the  pilot phase, including an analysis of factors contributing to the  current geographic distribution of AIJ projects and whether  conclusive decisions on the pilot phase should be taken at COP-6  or by the end of the decade as stated in decision 6/CP.4. The  discussions also addressed whether the current review process  should refer to links between AIJ and Protocol Articles 6 (JI)  and 12 (CDM) projects.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

Delegates were heard commenting that they have had to temper  their expectations for the pace of work on the Protocol  mechanisms given the state of preparedness within the G-77/China.  Meetings planned originally for Thursday onwards and rescheduled  for Friday evening and Saturday morning were postponed to next  week as the G-77/China had yet to formulate its positions. Some  delegates said the slow pace of negotiations within the G-77/China could be attributed to the complex and highly advanced  nature of discussions combined with the radically differing  starting points and presumptions on which they are based. Some  felt that differences within the group on the extent of expected  financial flows from the mechanisms were in part responsible for  differing starting points. There is a growing recognition that  complexity in itself is a factor that will demand attention in  future planning of the negotiating process. Some observers have  recommended convening informal preparatory sessions during the  year to address this concern and help meet upcoming deadlines,  notably those from the Buenos Aires Plan of Action.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR

## Contact Group on Mechanisms

The contact group on mechanisms will  meet in the afternoon.

Consult the meeting board for time and location of other  meetings.