---
title: "HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE FOURTH UNFCCC CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES, 6 NOVEMBER 1998"
id: enb1292e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1292e
date: 1998-11-06
abstract: "Delegates held regional group consultations in the morning. In  the afternoon, the COP plenary considered: reports from the  subsidiary bodies; possible decisions under Article 4.2(f); and  statements from intergovernmental organizations. Contact groups  met in the evening and over the weekend."
---

# COP PLENARY

COP-4 President Maria Julia Alsogaray (Argentina) offered  condolences to the Caribbean and Latin American countries  recently devastated by hurricane Mitch. She noted that over the  past year floods, fires, droughts and hurricanes have profoundly  effected countries around the world and suggested that 'Mother  Nature' was reminding delegates that urgent action was needed.  EL SALVADOR, for the CENTRAL AMERICAN GROUP, said these events  should remind all participants of their vulnerability to  disasters and should prompt action.

Delegates observed a moment of silence for the recent tragedies  at the request of INDONESIA. He also proposed that the  Secretariat draft a statement of sympathy for the affected  countries. The President reported that Antigua and Barbuda  ratified the Kyoto Protocol on 3 November.

# REPORT OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES

SBSTA Chair Kok Kee Chow reported that SBSTA had completed  initial consideration of all its sub-items. On development and  transfer of technology, he said a contact group had met once and  would meet again. Deliberations on research and systematic  observation have progressed rapidly. On the proposal from  Brazil, he said draft conclusions would be forthcoming on  Monday. On land use change and forestry, he reported that the  contact group Co-Chairs were drafting a decision. Consultations  are ongoing on the impact of single project emissions in the  commitment period and are nearing conclusions. On review of AIJ,  the Chair said the informal consultations were making good  progress. On Protocol mechanisms, a joint contact group has held  an initial meeting to exchange views and will meet again.

SBI Chair Bakary Kante reported that all items referred to SBI  had been considered. Contact groups are considering budgetary  issues, national communications from Annex I Parties, initial  communications from non-Annex I Parties and the second review of  adequacy of commitments. On implementation of FCCC Articles 4.8  and 4.9, a contact group will base its discussion on those begun  at the last session.

The President of the COP invited comments on the draft decision  on the review of implementation of commitments and of other  provisions of the Convention (FCCC/CP/1998/L.2). Under the draft  decision, the COP would decide to defer the review of this  matter until COP-5. TURKEY reiterated that its current Annex I  status is an anomaly that delays its ratification of the  Convention. PAKISTAN called for the resolution of the issue to  allow Turkey to participate in the process.

On the reports of the subsidiary bodies, G-77/CHINA reiterated  the importance of technology transfer to developing countries  and proposed the establishment of a technology transfer  mechanism. He urged developed country Parties to prioritize the  implementation of the Convention over economic and political  considerations. The RUSSIAN FEDERATION requested the subsidiary  body chairs to elaborate on the difficulties they have  encountered and how these can be overcome. SBSTA Chair Chow said  the issues were still under discussion in the designated contact  groups.

The Chair of AG13, Patrick Széll, presented the draft decision  on the Multilateral Consultative Process (FCCC/CP/1998/L.3). He  reported that Parties had accepted the thrust of the proposal.  The Chair adopted the decision and said she would hold  intersessional meetings to tackle outstanding issues.

The CBD Secretariat highlighted the linkages between the  desertification, biodiversity and climate change conventions and  the common concern of sustainable development underlying their  agenda. He spoke of CBD decisions that emphasized cooperation  between the relevant Secretariats, in particular regarding  management of information from Parties, provided to fulfil their  commitments under the Conventions. The Secretariat said it was  ready to act on areas of common and shared interest.

President Alsogaray introduced Item 7C, which were statements  from international government organizations. Hama Arba Diallo,  Executive Secretary of the UN Convention to Combat  Desertification (CCD), spoke of the Argentine interest and  commitment to CCD. He suggested that the CCD and the FCCC were  related because of their institutional arrangements and their  commitment to the principles of sustainable development. He  indicated that there should be a convergence of the Rio  secretariats to work together for common goals.

William Kennedy, Senior Officer for the European Bank for  Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), described activities,  such as developing innovative financial mechanisms and  supporting the shift to market economy, undertaken in countries  with economies in transition, while considering the implications  to the environment and climate change. Prodipto Ghosh, Senior  Environment Specialist from the Asian Development Bank,  discussed the support provided to GHG abatement projects in the  Asia-Pacific region. These included: supporting national  initiatives, encouraging energy efficiency and renewable energy  projects, preparing reports on national circumstances (ALGAS  reports) and supporting the development of national  communications in 11 countries. The Chief of the Environmental  Division of the Inter-American Development Bank, Walter  Arensberg, presented information on four themes to help  countries in Latin America and the Caribbean meet the challenges  of climate change. These included: assisting the enhancement of  relevant institutions, expanding the market for sustainable  energy to fit new mechanisms, providing financial and technical  assistance to carry out global protection programs, and  suggesting regulatory and institutional reforms for the private  sector.

# CONTACT GROUPS

The contact group on the financial mechanism, chaired by John  Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda) and Dan Reifsnyder (US), met to  discuss additional guidance to and status of the Global  Environmental Facility (GEF). The group first discussed a draft  decision presented by the G-77/CHINA  (FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.3/Add.1). While the EU supported the overall  framework of the G-77/China draft decision, with the US, he said  it should not include funding for stage II and III processes.  AUSTRALIA indicated that he might support stage II efforts now  and stage III.

The US tabled a draft decision that focused on: improvements at  the operational level of the GEF; resolving the status of and  guidance to the GEF in one draft decision; and GEF support  programs to assist developing countries in altering their policy  and legal frameworks in support of technology transfer. The G-77/CHINA said this proposal did not adequately meet the needs of  developing country Parties. A smaller informal group will meet  to draft a decision for the contact group to consider at their  next meeting.

The joint contact group on mechanisms, chaired by Luiz Gylvan  Meira Filho (Brazil) and Yvo de Boer (Netherlands) met on Friday  to discuss a work programme prepared by the Co-Chairs. The G-77/CHINA stressed the need for a clear section devoted to the  nature and scope of the mechanisms to facilitate comparison. He  added that the mechanisms should not exacerbate the economic  disadvantage of certain countries, and called for the CDM to be  discussed on a priority basis. HONDURAS, supported by several  Latin American countries, suggested expeditious creation of the  CDM, calling for an 'interim phase approach' to develop  guidelines and rules. The US stressed parallel progress on all  mechanisms. The EU preferred a general, rather than a detailed,  debate. NEW ZEALAND stressed the importance of developing a  timeline for discussion. Several Parties expressed concern about  the length of the draft work programme. SWITZERLAND provided the  Chairs with a two-page work programme. The contact group met on  Saturday to continue discussion on the work programme, with a  much-shortened version prepared by the Co-Chairs that included  the Honduran 'interim phase' proposal. After some discussion,  the Chair acknowledged differences in views among the Parties,  but said they were not incompatible. He suggested the Parties  conduct informal discussions and reconvene on Monday.

The contact group on technology met on Friday and Saturday to  discuss the proposals for a draft decision put forward by the  US, EU and G-77/China. The G-77/CHINA presented the principles  of the proposed technology transfer mechanism, drawing upon the  US and EU proposals. Further functions or features would be  determined as the process develops. The US reiterated its view  on market based technology transfer, noting that the Kyoto  Protocol places technology transfer and the market at the core  of the deliberations. Co-Chair Christ suggested the 'cat,' as  the process was referred to, could represent consultation and  capacity, access and advice on barrier removals and technology  transfer. She cautioned against duplication of ongoing  activities, such as the preparation of the IPCC Special Report  on Methodological and Technical Issues in Technology Transfer.  The PHILIPPINES questioned the need for further material  compilations and said although market based transfer exists, it  was not effective and required further measures. The Co-Chair  proposed that the Secretariat integrate the three proposals. The  delegates discussed the new draft at length and made significant  progress. On Saturday evening, the meeting adjourned to allow  further consultations on the outstanding issues relating to what  to call the process.

The contact group on FCCC Article 4.2 (a) and (b) (review of  adequacy of commitments), co-chaired by Jennifer Irish (Canada)  and Margaret Mukahanana (Zimbabwe), met over the weekend. A  discussion of four draft proposals, presented by AUSTRALIA, the  EU, G-77/CHINA and the US, dominated discussion. Debate  concerned procedural issues on how to address the texts, with  the G-77/CHINA indicating its reluctance to consider a  compilation text prepared by the Co-Chairs. After extensive  debate, the G-77/CHINA proposed, with the EU and NEW ZEALAND, a  reworked text as a negotiating document. The US, with the  eventual support of G-77/CHINA, rejected the compilation  document and called on the four draft decisions to be presented  in their entirety to the SBI. The Parties justified the cautious  approach, citing this issue's crucial importance to national  positions. CHINA said he interpreted the US and AUSTRALIA  proposals as an attempt to exact commitments from developing  countries. The US and AUSTRALIA noted that the scientific and  technical evaluation from the IPCC indicated that developed  country actions would be insufficient to meet the aims of the  Convention, and the US incorporated this into its submission.  The meeting ended without clear resolution about the report the  Co-Chairs should present to the SBI.

The contact group on national communications from Annex I  Parties, chaired by Mohamed Ould El Ghaouth (Mauritania) and  Alexander Metalnikov (Russian Federation), met over the weekend  and formulated a draft decision. It proposed that the third  national communications from Annex I Parties be due in 2001 and  that subsequent national communications be due every 3 to 5  years. The decision included a statement on the need for further  efforts by Parties to improve completeness, consistency and  comparability of data and information, as well as participating,  through the SBI, in evaluating and refining the review process.  It proposed that the Secretariat complete a feasibility study on  the potential usefulness of data comparison and report on  information contained in annual national inventory submissions.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### CONTACT GROUPS

Contact groups will meet in morning and  afternoon sessions.

### SBSTA

SBSTA will meet in Plenary I at 3:00 pm.