---
title: "HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE MEETINGS OF THE FCCC SUBSIDARY BODIES 1 AUGUST 1997"
id: enb1250e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1250e
date: 1997-08-01
abstract: "The seventh session of the Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin  Mandate (AGBM) of the Framework Convention on Climate  Change (FCCC) opened on 31 July 1997 in Bonn, Germany.  Delegates gave opening statements in a morning Plenary  session and attended closed meetings in the afternoon to  discuss the topic of continuing to advance implementation  of existing commitments in Article 4.1 and quantified  emissions limitation and reduction objectives (QELROS)."
---

# PLENARY

Chair Raul Estrada-Oyuela (Argentina) opened the seventh  session of the AGBM and said that as COP-3 approached, he  remained optimistic despite expected difficulties. He noted  that the G-7+1 meeting in Denver and UNGASS demonstrated  new interest in climate change problems. He pointed out  that, although some criticized the scope of the Berlin  Mandate, AGBM is not competent to change it. He noted that  under FCCC, developed countries committed themselves to  take the lead in reducing emissions and not until this  occured, would developing countries be able to assume  greater responsibilities. He acknowledged progress toward  an agreement, and pointed to the EU commitment and proposal  as a step forward. He noted that two Parties' definitions  on targets would be crucial to the process.

FCCC Executive Secretary Michael Zammit-Cutajar indicated  that, at Kyoto, he expected a clear agreement on the  understanding of Annex I country commitments under FCCC.  The result from Kyoto should be a 'strong punch' against '  business as usual.' It should send a signal to the real  economic actors that things will change in a way that is  compatible both with their interests and with sustainable  development. It should be possible to monitor  implementation. Although optimistic, he recognized the  difficulty in reducing the proposals on the table to the  sort of signal he described. He urged delegations to enter  into a negotiating mode proving that they are able to go  beyond 'playing with text.' TANZANIA, on behalf of the G-77/CHINA, said that the basis  for action and for an agreement must be strict adherence to  the Convention and to the Berlin Mandate. He indicated that  an agreement entailed advancing commitments for Annex I  Parties, while avoiding new ones for non-Annex I Parties.  He referred to UNGASS outcomes, highlighting that in  addition to establishing targets, there was widespread  agreement that it will be necessary to achieve them taking  into account the adverse effects of response measures on  all countries, especially the developing countries.

IPCC Chair Bert Bolin remarked on the Second Assessment  Report, which states that 'the balance of evidence suggests  a discernible human influence on global climate.' He stated  that enhanced GHG concentrations correspond to a change in  global mean temperature of 0.7-2.1ยบ C, but are limited to  0.2-1.1ยบ C by aerosol concentrations and climate system  inertia. He stated that global warming for the full range  of IPCC emission scenarios and climate sensitivities was  estimated to be in the range 1.0-3.5ยบ C by the year 2100.  He noted that recent analysis shows that Annex I countries  were responsible for 64% of the total CO2 emissions in  1996, down from 75% in 1985. Although most of the increased  emissions stem from non-Annex I countries, they will not  reach 50% of the total emissions until at least 15-20 years  from now. He noted that stabilization of CO2 in the long- term requires efforts by all countries. He stated the  efficient use of energy is the prime and most obvious  short-term measure to be considered both by Annex I and  non-Annex I countries.

LUXEMBOURG, on behalf of the EU, recalled its proposal that  'Annex X' Parties, individually or jointly, in accordance  with the Berlin Mandate, should reduce emission levels for  CO2, CH4 and N2O together (weighted total, using Global  Warming Potential with a 100-year time horizon) by 2005 by  at least 7.5% below 1990 levels. He also proposed that HFC,  PFC and SF6 should be added no later than 2000 to the  'basket' of gases for these reduction objectives. He said  that developed countries must face up to their  responsibilities and take the lead. However, all Parties  must realize that in the longer term an increasingly global  effort is needed to tackle the issue.

BRAZIL summarized its proposal  (FCCC/AGBM/1997/MISC.1/Add.3) by calling for a direct and  objective link to be established between the annual rate of  GHG emissions and the increase in global mean surface  temperature. He proposed that reduction targets be  established in terms of temperature change. He called for  the establishment of a mechanism to guarantee that non- Annex I countries address climate change. He called for the  development of quantitative targets for non-Annex I  countries as they reach appropriate levels of well-being.  He proposed that the Clean Development Fund receive  mandatory contributions from Annex I Parties in proportion  to their overall non-compliance. He noted four points of  negotiation: reduction targets of Annex I Parties expressed  in temperature change; time of performance review for Annex  I countries; initial year of consideration for historical  emissions; and value of assessed contribution to the Clean  Development Fund. He requested that the proposal be  formally submitted to the COP-3.

ZIMBABWE, for the African Group, expressed hope that the  AGBM will accelerate the negotiating process and reach  agreement by the end of the next session. She noted that  African countries are often marginalized by the interim  funding mechanism process. She expressed concern with the  lack of progress made in political deliberations and urged  that the policies and measures (P&Ms) and quantified  emissions limitation and reduction objectives within  specified time frames (QELROs) contain provisions for  socio-economic impact assessments. She noted that any  decision reached should not increase the socio-economic and  environmental burdens placed on Africa. She stated that an  agreement should include commitment of financial resources  and technologies for African countries.

The RUSSIAN FEDERATION said the outcome should go through  the same ratification process as the Convention and that  CO2 reduction targets must be considered alongside goals  for removal. SLOVENIA signaled its preparation to  eventually join Annex I Parties in complying with legally  binding commitments and supported an EU proposal for GHG  reductions.

The US said the AGBM agreement must maintain legally  binding targets, provide maximum flexibility, include  credible and realistic levels, include mechanisms for  national compliance and involve all countries. He said it  was not possible to decide what kind of numerical target  might be undertaken without knowing what constraints would  be imposed on such a target. The US had introduced  proposals on emissions trading, joint implementation, a  budget process and a banking process to increase  flexibility and reduce costs. In this regard he outlined  two new proposals, which he said are critical in  determining the agreement structure. He explained that a  legally binding agreement would require a compliance  mechanism to which flexibility concepts could be added,  although these were currently tinged with some political  heat. He also called for a comprehensive approach including  all GHGs, sources, sectors and sinks. Where countries  failed to use the enabling IPCC methodology to adopt such  an approach they should be penalized. On all-country  participation, he called for an improved definition of  Article 4.1 and the Berlin Mandate. While there is a  difference between Annex I and non-Annex I countries it was  unreasonable to expect that there was nothing to be done  between the Annex I and non-Annex I commitments. To address  this the US had proposed some middle ground. The US  proposal includes a recommendation for a long-term process  toward the objective of the Convention including all  countries and seeking evolution. A new negotiation would  certainly follow the AGBM and within that timeframe all  countries must participate.

UZBEKISTAN said the countries in transition require  investment in new technologies. SAUDI ARABIA addressed  contradictions in Annex I policies, such as increased  fossil fuel production by developed countries in the event  of lower consumption, leading to lower imports, and  subsidies provided to some fossil fuel sectors while taxing  the use of other fossil fuels. He asked for consideration  of compensation in the event of negative economic impacts  on some States.

The Chair outlined the organization of work (Item 2(b)) and  introduced documentation, including the main negotiating  text compiled at AGBM-6 (FCCC/AGBM/1997/3/Add.1) and  proposals from Parties received after AGBM-6  (FCCC/AGBM/1997/MISC.1/Add.2,3,4, and 5). The Chair stated  that delegates would meet in closed sessions in the  afternoon: continuing to advance implementation of existing  commitments in Article 4.1, chaired by Evans King (Trinidad  and Tobago); and QELROS, chaired by Luiz Gylvan Meira Filho  (Brazil). Closed non-group sessions on Article 4.1 will  continue on Friday. A non-group on institutions, mechanisms  and other clauses, chaired by Takao Shibata (Japan) will  begin on Friday. Briefings for observers will be held each  morning.

The Chair invited a number of Parties with new proposals to  make presentations. JAPAN called for: a SBSTA study on the  removal of carbon dioxide via sinks before the issue is  taken up under QELROS; a review process to reflect the  latest science; and for linkage between entry into force of  an agreement and the total aggregate emissions of ratifying  countries.

GEORGIA called for improved financial mechanisms for the  energy sector and to encourage private sector participation  in AIJ.

SAMOA, for the ALLIANCE OF SMALL ISLAND STATES, outlined  proposals to fully reflect the precautionary principle in  the work of the AGBM. He said a guiding objective of the  AGBM agreement should be to ensure that global sea level  rise resulting from climate change does not exceed 20 cm  above 1990 levels, and that the average global temperature  does not exceed 2ยบC above the pre-industrial level.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

### NON-GROUP ON ARTICLE 4.1 (COMMITMENTS)

In the non-group  meeting on Article 4.1, delegates agreed to negotiate on  the basis of a paper proposed by Chair Evans King (Trinidad  and Tobago). The first four paragraphs of the chapeau were  discussed, which refer to advancing the implementation of  commitments and the Berlin Mandate. Some non-Annex I  countries reportedly sought to include references to the  Berlin Mandate along with a number of other elements from  the FCCC, including a specific reference to no new non- Annex I commitments, but some Annex I countries objected.  Some delegations were reluctant to include a reference to  the principle of common but differentiated  responsibilities. There were proposals to delete paragraphs  that conditioned advancement of commitments by non-Annex I  Parties on the provision of financial resources and  transfer of technology by developed countries. One  developed country put forward an alternative draft paper  that would commit Parties to advance implementation of  Article 4.1 and to a strengthen collaboration.

### NON-GROUP ON QELROS

The first meeting of the non-group on  QELROS, chaired by Luiz Gylvan Meira Filho (Brazil),  considered two questions: which greenhouse gases (GHGs) to  include in the agreement and whether to adopt a gross or  net approach. A draft paper is to be produced to reflect  the two main arguments put forward regarding the gross  approach. On the question of which GHGs are to be covered,  a group of developed country favored a 'basket' approach  while other developed countries supported the inclusion of  all gases. The possibility of amending a protocol or legal  instrument over time to bring new gases into the agreement  was raised, as was the alternative approach of dealing with  sources of gases rather than the gases themselves. The  Chair's draft text is expected for the next meeting.  Another approach would reportedly address all gases but  adopt a schedule for tackling different GHGs over time.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### OBSERVER BRIEFING

A briefing for observers is scheduled  for 9:45 am.

### NON-GROUP SESSIONS

The non-group on Article 4.1 will meet at 10:00am and  1:00pm.

The non-group on institutions, mechanisms, and other  elements will meet at 10:00am.

The non-group on QELROs will reconvene at 3:00pm.

### AGBM

AGBM is scheduled to meet Monday at 10:00 am.