---
title: "SUMMARY OF THE RESUMED SIXTH SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE UN FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE:  16-27 JULY 2001"
id: enb12176e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12176e
date: 2001-07-27
abstract: "The resumed sixth session of the Conference of the Parties (COP-6  Part II) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate  Change (UNFCCC) and the fourteenth sessions of the UNFCCC's  subsidiary bodies were held in Bonn, Germany, from 16-27 July.  Over 4,600 participants from 181 governments, 254  intergovernmental, non-governmental and other observer  organizations, and 332 media outlets were in attendance. The  meeting sought to successfully complete negotiations aimed at  setting the operational details for commitments on reducing  emissions of greenhouse gases under the 1997 Kyoto Protocol. It  also sought agreement on actions to strengthen implementation of  the UNFCCC itself. In attempting to achieve these goals, which  were set out in the 1998 Buenos Aires Plan of Action (BAPA), the  resumed COP-6 was intended to bring to a close more than two and a  half years of preparations and negotiations, and to complete the  tasks that had been left unfinished at COP-6 in The Hague in  November 2000."
---

From 16-18 July, delegates met in closed negotiating groups to  reduce differences on texts for decisions on a range of issues  related to the Protocol and the UNFCCC, including: financial  issues; the mechanisms; compliance; and land use, land-use change  and forestry (LULUCF).

On Thursday, 19 July, the high-level segment of the resumed COP-6  began, with participants striving to make a breakthrough by  achieving agreement on a 'political' decision on key outstanding  issues. On Saturday night, after protracted consultations,  President Pronk presented his proposal for a draft political  decision outlining agreements on core elements of the BAPA.  However, in spite of several Parties announcing Sunday that they  could support the political decision, disagreements surfaced over  the section on compliance.

President Pronk held ongoing consultations on this section until  Monday morning, when the ministers finally agreed to adopt the  original political decision from Saturday, with a revised section  on compliance. The political decision - or 'Bonn Agreement' - was  approved by the ministers in Plenary late Monday morning, and  formally adopted by the COP on Wednesday evening, 25 July. High- level discussions over the weekend also resulted in a Political  Declaration by a number of developed countries, in which they  pledged additional funding for climate change activities for  developing countries.

During the remainder of the second week, delegates attempted to  clear all remaining brackets in the outstanding texts held over  from COP-6 Part I, based on the political guidance set out under  the Bonn Agreement. Although decisions were adopted on several key  issues, delegates were unable to complete all their work on the  mechanisms, compliance and LULUCF. Since not all texts in the  entire 'package' of decisions were completed, all decisions were  forwarded to COP-7, where delegates will attempt to conclude their  negotiations.

The fourteenth sessions of the COP's subsidiary bodies met at the  same time as the resumed COP-6. After a number of informal  consultations, the subsidiary bodies adopted draft conclusions on  a range of issues, including reports on inter-sessional  activities, policies and measures, cooperation with relevant  international organizations, and administrative and financial  matters.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE UNFCCC AND THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

Climate change is considered one of the most serious threats to  the sustainability of the world's environment, human health and  well-being, and the global economy. Mainstream scientists agree  that the Earth's climate is being affected by the build-up of  greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide, caused by human  activities. Despite some lingering uncertainties, a majority of  scientists believe that precautionary and prompt action is  necessary.

The international response to climate change took shape with the  development of the UNFCCC. Adopted in 1992, the UNFCCC sets out a  framework for action aimed at stabilizing atmospheric  concentrations of greenhouse gases at a level that would prevent  human-induced actions from leading to 'dangerous interference'  with the climate system. The UNFCCC entered into force on 21 March  1994. It now has 186 Parties. Six meetings of the COP have taken  place, as well as numerous workshops and meetings of the COP's  subsidiary bodies.

### THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

In 1995, the Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin  Mandate was established by COP-1 to reach agreement on a further  step in efforts to combat climate change. Following intense  negotiations culminating at COP-3, held in Kyoto, Japan, in  December 1997, delegates agreed to a Protocol to the UNFCCC that  commits developed countries and countries making the transition to  a market economy to achieve quantified targets for decreasing  their emissions of greenhouse gases. These countries, known under  the UNFCCC as Annex I Parties, committed themselves to reducing  their overall emissions of six greenhouse gases by at least 5%  below 1990 levels over the period between 2008 and 2012, with  specific targets varying from country to country. The Protocol  also provided the basis for three mechanisms to assist Annex I  Parties in meeting their national targets cost-effectively - an  emissions trading system, joint implementation (JI) of emissions- reduction projects between Annex I Parties, and a Clean  Development Mechanism (CDM) to encourage joint projects between  Annex I and non-Annex I (developing country) Parties.

It was left for subsequent meetings to decide on most of the rules  and operational details that will determine how these cuts in  emissions are achieved and how countries' efforts are measured and  assessed. Although 84 countries had signed the Protocol as of 20  July 2001, most have been waiting for the negotiation of the  operational details before deciding whether to ratify. To enter  into force, the Protocol must be ratified by 55 Parties to the  UNFCCC, including Annex I Parties representing at least 55% of the  total carbon dioxide emissions for 1990. To date, 37 Parties have  ratified the Protocol.

### THE BUENOS AIRES PLAN OF ACTION

COP-4 met in Buenos Aires,  Argentina, in November 1998, to set out a schedule for reaching  agreement on the operational details of the Protocol and for  strengthening implementation of the UNFCCC itself. This work  schedule was outlined in a document called the Buenos Aires Plan  of Action (BAPA). The critical deadline under the BAPA was COP-6,  where Parties were to attempt to reach agreement on a package of  issues. Critical Protocol-related issues needing resolution  included rules relating to the mechanisms, a regime for assessing  Parties' compliance, and accounting methods for national emissions  and emissions reductions. Rules on crediting countries for carbon  sinks were also to be addressed. Issues under the UNFCCC requiring  resolution included questions of capacity building, the  development and transfer of technology, and assistance to those  developing countries that are especially vulnerable to the adverse  effects of climate change or to actions taken by industrialized  countries to combat climate change.

### PREPARATIONS FOR COP-6

Numerous formal and informal meetings and  consultations were held during 1999 and 2000 to help lay the  foundations for an agreement at COP-6. At the thirteenth sessions  of the subsidiary bodies - which began in September 2000 in Lyon,  France, and which were the final formal sessions before COP-6 -  political positions on the key issues remained entrenched, with  little indication of willingness to compromise or move forward.  While informal meetings and consultations held in October and  early November 2000 resulted in some further progress, many  differences remained.

### COP-6 PART I

COP-6 and the resumed thirteenth sessions of the  UNFCCC's subsidiary bodies were held in The Hague, the  Netherlands, from 13-25 November 2000. During the second week of  negotiations, COP-6 President Jan Pronk, Minister of Housing,  Spatial Planning and Environment of the Netherlands, attempted to  facilitate progress on the many disputed political and technical  issues by convening high-level informal Plenary sessions to  address the key political issues, which he grouped into four  'clusters' or 'boxes,' as follows: (a) capacity building,  technology transfer, adverse effects and guidance to the financial  mechanism; (b) mechanisms; (c) LULUCF; and, (d) compliance,  policies and measures (P&Ms), and accounting, reporting and review  under Protocol Articles 5 (methodological issues), 7  (communication of information) and 8 (review of information).  Ministers and other senior negotiators convened in four groups to  negotiate on these clusters in an attempt to reach consensus.

However, by Thursday, 23 November, negotiations appeared stalled,  and President Pronk distributed a Note containing his proposals on  key issues in an attempt to encourage a breakthrough. After almost  36 hours of intense talks on the President's proposals,  negotiators could not achieve an agreement, with financial issues,  supplementarity in the use of the mechanisms, compliance and  LULUCF proving to be particular sticking points. On Saturday  afternoon, 25 November, President Pronk convened a final high- level informal Plenary in which he announced that delegates had  failed to reach agreement. Delegates agreed to suspend COP-6, and  expressed a willingness to resume their work in 2001.

### PREPARATIONS FOR COP-6 PART II

A number of meetings and  consultations were convened after COP-6 Part I in an effort to get  negotiations back on track. Shortly before COP-6 Part II, informal  high-level consultations chaired by President Pronk were held in  Scheveningen, the Netherlands, from 27-28 June 2001. Over 350  delegates from as many as 130 Parties participated, including a  number of ministers and deputy ministers. The aim of the  consultations was to permit Parties to present to President Pronk  their views on his June consolidated negotiating text, which he  had presented as a tool to help negotiators reach a  compromise.While some participants expressed the opinion that  positions did not appear to have shifted since COP-6 Part I,  others underscored that positions had possibly widened. They also  noted signs of entrenchment by some Parties, in particular on the  subjects of LULUCF, sinks in the CDM, and the use of nuclear  facilities to meet commitments. The funding issue also appeared to  be a potential problem. Further concerns were raised by some  ambiguity on the part of Japan regarding its intentions for  ratifying the Protocol.

In addition to official preparations for COP-6 Part II, there were  a number of political developments following the meeting in The  Hague. In March 2001, the US administration declared its  opposition to the Protocol, stating that it believed it to be  'fatally flawed,' as it would damage its economy and exempted  developing countries from fully participating. Following the US  announcement, the EU sent diplomatic missions to several Parties,  including Japan, Australia, Canada, the Russian Federation and  Iran, in an effort to maintain support for the Protocol and its  entry into force by 2002. The US indicated that it would  participate at COP-6 Part II in negotiations on the Protocol in  cases where talks might lead to outcomes affecting legitimate US  interests, or if negotiations could set precedents for other  international agreements. It would be fully involved in all  discussions relating to commitments under the UNFCCC.

# REPORT OF COP-6 PART II

The resumed Sixth Conference of the Parties (COP-6 Part II) to the  UNFCCC opened on Monday morning, 16 July 2001. COP-6 President Jan  Pronk, Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and Environment of  the Netherlands, opened the resumed COP-6, noting that  participants were meeting to resolve outstanding issues from the  first part of COP-6 in The Hague in November 2000. He said the  negotiations would be based on bracketed texts brought forward  from The Hague. In addition, an unbracketed consolidated  negotiating text he had developed would serve as a 'tool' to  assist negotiators. Iran, on behalf of the G-77/China, drew  attention to developments since COP-6 Part I, including the US  administration's announcement. He stressed that delegates are in  Bonn to complete their unfinished work, and highlighted the need  to clearly differentiate between UNFCCC and Protocol issues under  negotiation.

Opening speeches were also presented during a welcoming ceremony  for ministers and other high-level officials on Thursday  afternoon, 19 July, which marked the beginning of the high-level  segment of negotiations, held from 19-23 July. Emphasizing that  the Protocol is 'the only game in town' and that it is fair and  credible, President Pronk urged Parties not to hold back on  ratifying because one nation does not intend to ratify.

Barbel Dieckmann, Mayor of Bonn, elaborated on the presence of the  UNFCCC Secretariat and other UN bodies and agencies in Bonn. She  outlined efforts to increase the UN presence, including plans for  a new UN campus. UNFCCC Executive Secretary Michael Zammit Cutajar  recalled the aims of the BAPA, and highlighted the challenges and  needs of developing countries in responding to climate change.  Noting progress in talks during the past few days, he said it  would be a waste to 'abandon the investment' of several years of  negotiations. Robert Watson, Chair of the Intergovernmental Panel  on Climate Change (IPCC), stated that all the scenarios considered  for the next century predict an ongoing increase in carbon dioxide  levels, more extreme weather events, temperature increases,  changes in precipitation, sea level rise, and impacts on  agricultural productivity. He noted that cost-effective  technologies exist to target greenhouse gas emissions. He said the  costs of addressing climate change domestically are estimated at  0.2-2 percent of GDP, falling even lower if international  cooperation occurs.

Representatives of a recent Youth Conference on Climate Change  delivered their views. One speaker urged delegates not to increase  the use of sinks in the Protocol, and said Annex I Parties should  meet at least half of their commitments domestically. A second  speaker told delegates that young people were 'extremely  disappointed with your disregard for our future' at The Hague, and  urged them not to fail in Bonn.

A number of Parties then made general statements. The G-77/China  expressed concern at the unilateral approach of the US, and  emphasized: preference for three separate decisions on the  mechanisms; the need to address adverse effects; support for  legally binding consequences of non-compliance; and the need for  further negotiations on LULUCF. Belgium, for the EU, said it is  ready for compromises with all Parties to reach agreement on a  balanced package that respects: environmental integrity; equity  and solidarity with developing countries; and economic efficiency  and flexibility in meeting the agreed targets. Samoa, for the  Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS), emphasized the need for  additional funds to undertake adaptation. The Czech Republic, for  CG-11 (a group of central and eastern European countries),  expressed concern with the Pronk text on financial obligations for  Annex I Parties not included in Annex II, and with proposals for a  levy on joint implementation and emissions trading. Morocco  expressed his hope that COP-7 would provide renewed impetus ahead  of the Johannesburg 2002 World Summit on Sustainable Development.

Australia stated that uncertainty regarding future involvement of  certain States should not stop key issues from being addressed,  and emphasized: non-discriminatory rules on sinks; a compliance  system that assists Parties rather than punishes non-compliance;  and the launch of dialogue on action with developing countries.  Canada underlined the importance of efficient and accessible  market mechanisms, the role of forests and agriculture as carbon  sinks, and the need to encourage developing country action.

Underlining the importance of US participation, Japan said it is  proactively engaged in consultations with the US, but that this  should not delay progress at this session. She said Japan will  exert its utmost efforts to make it possible for many countries,  including itself, to 'conclude the Protocol,' aiming at entry into  force by 2002. The US said it intends to address climate change in  a 'serious, sensible and science-based manner' and would not  prevent others from going ahead with the Protocol 'so long as they  do not harm legitimate US interests.' Switzerland, for the Environmental Integrity Group (Mexico,  Republic of Korea, and Switzerland), said sinks should be of a  limited scale, mechanisms should complement domestic action, and  there should be a strong compliance regime with legally binding  consequences. China noted a document outlining its achievements to  address climate change. The Russian Federation emphasized the need  for simplicity in the mechanisms, and including sinks and nuclear  facilities, and expressed concern with proposals on financial  issues.

## ORGANIZATIONAL MATTERS

### STATUS OF RATIFICATION

Delegates met on Thursday morning, 19  July, in a plenary session to address organizational matters. The  COP noted that 185 States and one regional economic integration  organization are Parties to the UNFCCC and that 35 States have  deposited their instruments of ratification or accession to the  Kyoto Protocol. President Pronk added that Vanuatu had recently  ratified the Protocol, and Argentina, Senegal, Colombia, the Cook  Islands and Bangladesh said they were in the process of taking  similar steps.

### ADMISSION OF ORGANIZATIONS AS OBSERVERS

On the admission of  observers, the COP approved the list of organizations recommended  by the Bureau on 19 July (FCCC/CP/2001/L.1).

### ELECTION OF OFFICERS OTHER THAN THE PRESIDENT

The COP elected its  Bureau members during COP-6 Part I, with the exception of a second  Vice-President to be nominated by the Asian Group. In Plenary on  16 July, and again on 27 July, President Pronk noted that this  Group was still considering the matter. Noting that the Bureau has  important work to do before a new Bureau is elected at COP-7,  including a meeting in early September in Marrakech, he urged the  Asian Group to redouble its efforts to reach agreement on this  matter.

### ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON CREDENTIALS

The resumed COP-6 adopted  the report on credentials of representatives (FCCC/CP/2001/3) on  Friday, 27 July.

## PREPARATIONS FOR COP/MOP-1 AND REVIEW OF UNFCCC COMMITMENTS AND  PROVISIONS

The critical issues addressed during the resumed Sixth Conference  of the Parties related to two agenda items: review of the  implementation of commitments and of other provisions of the  UNFCCC; and preparations for the first session of the Conference  of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto  Protocol (COP/MOP-1). These issues were highlighted in the BAPA,  which set COP-6 as the deadline for finalizing agreement.

The following section of this report provides a synopsis of the  process during the meeting, followed by an overview of the four  key issues negotiated at COP-6 Part II: financial issues; the  mechanisms; compliance; and LULUCF. This section also addresses  other issues relating to the implementation of the UNFCCC, and  preparations for COP/MOP-1. These include: national systems,  adjustments and guidelines under Protocol Articles 5  (methodological issues), 7 (communication of information) and 8  (review of information); activities implemented jointly under the  pilot phase; 'best practices' in P&Ms; and the impact of single  projects on emissions in the commitment period.

### AN OVERVIEW OF NEGOTIATIONS ON THE KEY ISSUES

From 16-18 July,  delegates met in closed negotiating groups, which aimed to  identify the key political issues to be resolved by ministers and  high-level officials. Discussions during these three days were  held on the basis of negotiating texts carried over from COP-6  Part I (see FCCC/CP/2000/5/Add.3, 'Part Three: Texts forwarded to  the resumed sixth session by the COP at the first part of its  sixth session,' Volumes I - V). These texts covered all issues  under negotiation, although many paragraphs remained heavily  bracketed. In addition, an unbracketed consolidated negotiating  text proposed in June by President Pronk served as a key 'tool'  for supporting the negotiations. This tool addressed critical  areas where disagreements remain, and attempted to establish a  balanced package of decisions on all issues covered by the BAPA.

###     High-level Segment (19-23 July):

On Thursday, 19 July, the high- level segment of COP-6 Part II began, with ministers and other  senior government officials in attendance. In their deliberations,  ministers and other officials began by considering a Note by the  Co-Chairs of the negotiating groups (FCCC/CP/2001/CRP.8), a  'streamlined document' that outlined clear options on all the key  outstanding political issues. They met in a main negotiating  group, known as the President's Group, as well as in four groups  considering the key issues. Substantive work began on Friday, 20  July.

Ministers and high-level officials met throughout the weekend and  into Monday morning. On Saturday night, 21 July, President Pronk  observed signs of an 'increasing consensus' and presented his  proposal for a draft decision outlining political agreements on  'core elements' of the BAPA. Notable features of the proposal  included: activities under Protocol Article 3.4 (additional  activities) during the first commitment period, with individual  Party caps on credits from forest management; afforestation and  reforestation projects in the CDM during the first commitment  period; a political declaration 'inviting' funding from Annex II  Parties; enforcement consequences aimed at restoring non- compliance and repairing damage to the environment in cases of  non-compliance; Annex I Parties refraining from using nuclear  facilities in the CDM and JI; domestic action constituting a  'significant element' of Annex I Parties' efforts to meet  commitments; and the establishment of funds for developing country  activities.

However, in spite of several Parties announcing Sunday that they  could support the political decision, disagreements surfaced over  the section on compliance. President Pronk held further intensive  consultations on this section throughout Sunday night and into  Monday morning, resulting in an agreement to adopt the original  political decision from Saturday, with a revised section on  compliance.

###     Bonn Agreement:

The political decision was approved by ministers  in a plenary session held Monday, and formally adopted by the COP  on Wednesday evening, 25 July (FCCC/CP/2001/L.7), after disputes  relating to 'technical' and 'editorial' changes made to the text  Monday night had been resolved.

###     Political Declaration:

Discussion over the weekend also resulted  in a Political Declaration by the EU, Canada, Iceland, Norway, New  Zealand and Switzerland on funding for developing countries. This  Declaration includes an undertaking to provide an annual  contribution of US$410 million by 2005.

###     Post-Bonn Agreement Negotiations:

During the remainder of the  second week, delegates agreed to resume in their negotiating  groups in an attempt to clear the remaining brackets in all  outstanding texts held over from The Hague, so as to reflect the  Bonn Agreement. Although consensus was reached on several key  issues, delegates were unable to complete their work after  disagreements continued over the draft decisions on the  mechanisms, compliance and LULUCF. Delegates will attempt to  conclude their work on the outstanding issues at COP-7.

### FINANCIAL ISSUES

The negotiations on financial issues addressed  capacity building, technology transfer, adaptation, UNFCCC Article  4.8 and 4.9 and Protocol Articles 2.3 and 3.14 (adverse effects),  and funding. These issues were dealt with in a negotiating group  co-chaired by John Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda) and Andrej Kranjc  (Slovenia), as well as in several sub-groups and drafting groups.  Some financial matters, especially those relating to funding, were  discussed as cross-cutting issues.

Delegates met in a closed negotiating group from 16-18 July, with  discussions addressing a variety of issues, including: concerns  about overburdening the Global Environment Facility (GEF); the  implications of relying on sources of information other than  national communications to determine action related to adaptation;  the specific concerns of least developed countries (LDCs);  institutional arrangements for technology transfer; the role and  composition of the technology transfer body of experts; and  proposals on funding, including whether to have voluntary or  mandatory levels of contribution. The group's discussions resulted  in agreement on the two draft decisions on capacity building.  Together with the Co-Chairs of the four negotiating groups, Co- Chairs Ashe and Kranjc prepared a Note (FCCC/CP/20001/CRP.8)  outlining clear options on the key outstanding political issues.

Ministers and other-high level officials began their substantive  discussions based on this Note on 19 July, with informal high- level consultations on finance facilitated by Secretary of State  Philippe Roch (Switzerland). One issue during the high-level  segment was the question of 'mandatory' or 'voluntary' funding.  However, developing countries compromised by agreeing not to  insist on mandatory funding.

###     Bonn Agreement:

The political decision agreed on Monday, 23 July,  and formally adopted by the COP on Wednesday, 25 July, contains  five sections related to the financial issues.

###     Funding under the UNFCCC:

The COP agrees that Annex II Parties,  and other Annex I Parties that are in a position to do so, should  provide funding to meet the commitments under UNFCCC Article 4.1  (commitments), 4.3 (funding), 4.4 (adaptation), 4.5 (technology  transfer), 4.8 and 4.9 (adverse effects) through the GEF  replenishment, the proposed special climate change fund, and  bilateral and multilateral channels. It further provides that  appropriate modalities for burden sharing among Annex II Parties  need to be developed. It specifies that the special climate change  fund is to be established to finance activities related to climate  change that are complementary to those funded by the resources  allocated to the GEF and bilateral and multilateral funding. These  activities include adaptation, technology transfer, energy,  transport, industry, agriculture, forestry and waste management,  as well as activities to assist developing countries diversify  their economies. The text also proposes that an LDC fund be  established, including for the purpose of funding NAPAs.

###     Funding under the Kyoto Protocol:

The COP agrees that appropriate  modalities for burden sharing need to be developed. It confirms  the establishment of the adaptation fund to finance concrete  adaptation projects in Parties to the Protocol. The adaptation  fund is to be financed from the share of proceeds on the CDM  project activities and other sources of funding. Annex I Parties  are invited to provide this additional funding. The fund is to be  operated by an entity operating the financial mechanism of the  UNFCCC.

###     Development and Transfer of Technologies:

The COP agrees to  establish an Expert Group on Technology Transfer comprised of 20  experts: three from each region of non-Annex I Parties; one from  the Small Island Developing States (SIDS); seven from Annex I  Parties; and three from relevant international organizations.

###     Implementation of UNFCCC Article 4.8 and 4.9 and Protocol Articles  2.3 and 3.14:

The COP agrees that the implementation of identified  activities in response to adverse effects of climate change be  supported through the GEF, the proposed special climate change  fund, and other bilateral and multilateral sources. The COP also  agrees to consider at its eighth session the implementation of  insurance-related actions to meet the specific needs and concerns  of developing country Parties arising from the adverse effects of  climate change, based on the outcome of workshops on insurance. On  impact of response measures, it agrees to support the  implementation of identified activities through the GEF, the  special climate change fund and other bilateral and multilateral  sources.

###     Matters relating to Protocol Article 3.14:

The COP recognizes that  minimizing the impact of the implementation of Protocol Article  3.1 (quantitative emissions commitments) is a development concern  affecting both developed and developing countries. It recommends  that the COP/MOP request Annex I Parties to provide information,  as part of the necessary supplementary information to their annual  inventory report, on how they are striving to implement  commitments under Article 3.1 in such a way as to minimize adverse  social, environmental and economic impacts on developing country  Parties. Priority should be given to the implementation of the  following actions:progressive reduction or phasing out of market imperfections,  fiscal incentives, tax and duty exemptions and subsidies in all  greenhouse gas emitting sectors, taking into account the need for  energy price reforms to reflect market prices and externalities; cooperation in the technological development of non-energy  uses of fossil fuels, and support to developing country Parties to  this end; and assistance to developing country Parties highly dependent on  the export and consumption of fossil fuels in diversifying their  economies.

###     Post-Bonn Agreement Negotiations:

Based on the political guidance  provided by the Bonn Agreement, the negotiating group on finance  resumed its work on the draft decisions forwarded from The Hague  to address outstanding text for draft decisions on adverse  effects, technology transfer and funding. The group approved draft  decisions on: UNFCCC Article 4.8 and 4.9; Protocol Article 3.14;  funding under UNFCCC; funding under the Protocol; technology  transfer; and guidance to the GEF.

On Friday, 27 July, delegates met in Plenary and approved all  eight draft decisions that had been agreed in the negotiating  group and sub-groups. Co-Chairs Ashe and Kranjc reported on the  success of the group, and requested the draft decisions to be  considered by the COP.

###     Draft Decisions forwarded to COP-7:

The eight draft decisions  completed on financial issues were the only ones of the four main  negotiating groups on which consensus had been achieved. The draft  decisions build on the Bonn Agreement and the following summaries  of these decisions focus on the elements elaborating on this  agreement.

###     Capacity Building:

The draft decision on capacity building in  developing countries (FCCC/CP/2001/L.2) requests the GEF to report  on its progress in support of the implementation of the capacity- building framework, and urges an operating entity of the financial  mechanism to adopt a streamlined and expedited approach in  financing activities of the framework. It requests the COP to draw  on information from national communications and reports from the  GEF and other agencies for the review of progress in the  implementation of the framework. The second draft decision, on  capacity building in EITs (FCCC/CP/2001/L.3), sets out in an annex  a capacity-building framework. It recommends that COP/MOP-1 adopt  a decision endorsing a framework for capacity building under the  UNFCCC that parallels the framework contained in the annex. Both  draft decisions give immediate effect to the frameworks.

###     Guidance to the GEF:

This draft decision (FCCC/CP/2001/L.4/Rev.1)  states that the GEF should provide financial resources to  developing country Parties, in particular to the LDCs and SIDS,  including for implementing Stage II adaptation activities and  establishing pilot or demonstration projects to show how  adaptation planning and assessment can be translated into  projects. The draft decision further urges the GEF to adopt a  streamlined approach in financing activities within the framework  for capacity building in developing countries.

###     Development and Transfer of Technologies:

The draft decision  (FCCC/CP/2001/L.10) establishes an expert group on technology  transfer and requests the GEF to provide financial support through  the special climate change fund for the implementation of the  framework annexed to the draft decision.

###     Adverse Effects:

Parties agreed to separate decisions on UNFCCC  Article 4.8 and 4.9, and Protocol Article 3.14 (adverse effects).  The draft decision on implementation of UNFCCC Article 4.8 and 4.9  (FCCC/CP/2001/L.12) states that the GEF should support activities  on information and methodologies, and on vulnerability and  adaptation. It also decides that the special climate change fund  and/or the adaptation fund and other bilateral and multilateral  sources should fund activities on adaptation, improving and  monitoring of diseases and vectors, and capacity building. It  further decides to establish a work programme on LDCs to:  strengthen existing and establish national climate change  secretariats; provide training in negotiating skills and language;  and support the preparation of NAPAs. In addition, the decision  provides for the establishment of an LDC fund. It also decides  that the GEF, the special climate change fund and other bilateral  and multilateral sources should fund activities to assist LDCs.

The draft decision on Protocol Article 3.14 (FCCC/CP/2001/L.13)  decides to develop guidelines to help determine if Annex I Parties  are striving to minimize adverse effects, and agrees that Annex II  Parties should give priority to assisting developing countries  highly dependent on the export and consumption of fossil fuels in  diversifying their economies.

###     Funding:

The draft decision on funding under the UNFCCC  (FCCC/CP/2001/L.14) states that: there is a need for funding that  is new and additional to GEF and multilateral and bilateral  funding; predictable funding should be available to non-Annex I  Parties; and a special climate change fund should be established.  The draft decision on funding under the Protocol  (FCCC/CP/2001/L.15) establishes an adaptation fund.

### MECHANISMS

Delegates met from 16-18 July in a closed negotiating  group chaired by Raúl Estrada-Oyuela (Argentina) and Kok Kee Chow  (Malaysia). The group considered The Hague and Pronk texts, and  identified the key political and technical issues to be resolved.  The six key 'technical issues' were: environmental impact  assessments; public participation; baselines; small-scale projects  in the CDM; certified emissions reduction (CER) transactions; and  mechanisms' eligibility and the verification procedures that may  be used in track two of JI projects.

The key political issues included: equity; supplementarity;  nuclear facilities in the CDM and JI; establishment and  composition of a supervisory committee for verification of CERs;  composition of the CDM Executive Board; level of the commitment  period reserve; application of share of proceeds to all three  mechanisms; the requirement that Annex I Parties' use of CERs be  conditional on it being party to the compliance agreement;  unilateral CDM; and sinks in the CDM. On sinks in the CDM, Co- Chair Estrada ruled against a request from a number of Umbrella  Group countries that an option be included providing for all sinks  project types within the CDM. Delegates also considered the  following political issues identified by the G-77/China: the lack  of parity between Annex I Parties under Protocol Article 4 (joint  fulfillment) and other Parties; the need for special consideration  for LDCs; financial additionality; and the equitable distribution  of CDM projects on a geographical basis.

Various options were presented for each of the political issues in  a Co-Chairs' Note (FCCC/CP/20001/CRP.8) for consideration during  the high-level segment. On Friday these discussions took place  within the President's Group, chaired by President Pronk, while on  Saturday the discussions on mechanisms were in a sub-group  facilitated by Minister Peter Hodgson (New Zealand). On the basis  of the high-level negotiations, President Pronk produced a 'core  elements' proposal late on Saturday night. The text relating to  mechanisms in this proposal was accepted on Monday, 23 July, and  forms part of the Bonn Agreement.

###     Bonn Agreement:

The political agreement on mechanisms addresses:  principles, nature and scope; JI; CDM; and emissions trading.

###     Principles, Nature and Scope:

The text on principles, nature and  scope provides for, inter alia, issues relating to equity,  supplementarity, share of proceeds and eligibility. On equity, the  COP agrees that Annex I Parties shall implement domestic action in  accordance with national circumstances and with a view to reducing  emissions in a manner conducive to narrowing per capita  differences in emissions between developed and developing country  Parties. The COP agrees that the share of proceeds, to assist  particularly vulnerable developing countries to meet adaptation  costs, shall be two percent of the CERs for a CDM project  activity.

On supplementarity, the COP agrees that:the use of mechanisms shall be supplemental to domestic  action and that domestic action shall constitute a 'significant  element' of the effort made by each Annex I Party to fulfill  Protocol Article 3.1 (quantitative emissions commitments); Annex I Parties shall be requested to provide relevant  information in relation to their supplemental activities, in  accordance with Protocol Article 7 (communication of information),  for review under Protocol Article 8 (review of information); the provision of such information shall take into account  reporting on 'demonstrable progress'; and the Compliance Committee's facilitative branch shall address  questions of implementation.

On eligibility, the COP agrees that a recommendation be made to  the COP/MOP that the eligibility of an Annex I Party to  participate in the mechanisms shall be dependent on its compliance  with methodological and reporting requirements under Protocol  Articles 5 and 7, with oversight being provided by the Compliance  Committee's enforcement branch. Furthermore, 'only Parties that  have accepted the agreement on compliance supplementing the Kyoto  Protocol shall be entitled to transfer or acquire credits  generated by the use of the mechanisms.'

###     JI and the CDM:

The COP agrees that it is the host Party's  prerogative to confirm whether JI/CDM project activities assist in  achieving sustainable development, and that Annex I Parties  'refrain' from using Emission Reduction Units (ERUs)/CERs  generated from nuclear facilities to meet Article 3.1 commitments.  On JI, the COP agrees to recommend to the COP/MOP the  establishment of a supervisory committee to supervise, inter alia,  the verification of ERUs.

On the CDM, the COP agrees to emphasize that public funding for  CDM projects from Annex I Parties is not to result in the  diversion of ODA, and is to be separate from and not counted  towards the financial obligations of Annex I Parties. It also  agrees to facilitate a prompt start for the CDM and to invite  nominations for membership of the executive board prior to COP-7  with a view to electing members at that session.

On the CDM executive board, the text states that the board shall  comprise ten members with one from each UN regional group, two  others from Annex I Parties, two others from non-Annex I Parties,  and one representative of SIDS. The board shall develop and  recommend to COP-8 simplified modalities and procedures for small- scale CDM project activities on: renewable energy projects with a  maximum output capacity equivalent of up to 15 megawatts; energy  efficiency improvement projects that reduce energy consumption on  the supply and/or demand side by up to the equivalent of 18  gigawatthours per year; or other projects that both reduce  anthropogenic emissions by sources and directly emit less that 15  kilotonnes of CO2 equivalent.

On sinks in the CDM, the COP agrees that afforestation and  reforestation shall be the only eligible LULUCF projects under the  CDM during the first commitment period, with implementation of  these projects guided by the LULUCF principles defined elsewhere  in the annex and by the definitions and modalities developed by  SBSTA for decision at COP-8 including on non-permanence,  additionality, leakage, scale uncertainties, and socio-economic  and environmental impacts. LULUCF activities under the CDM in  future commitment periods are to be decided in negotiations on the  second commitment period.

###     Emissions Trading:

On emissions trading, the COP agrees to  recommend to the COP/MOP that each Annex I Party shall maintain in  its national registry a commitment period reserve that should not  drop below 90% of the Party's assigned amount, calculated in terms  of Protocol Article 3.7 (individual assigned amounts) and 3.8  (base-year) or 100% of five times its most recently reviewed  inventory, whichever is lowest.

###     Post-Bonn Agreement Negotiations:

Following approval of the  political agreement on mechanisms, the negotiating group on  mechanisms reconvened on Wednesday and Thursday, 25-26 July, to  address the remaining technical issues. On Wednesday evening the  group received feedback from the two technical sub-groups, and  undertook a brief review of a Co-Chairs' proposed non-paper - a  consolidation of the political agreement, the Hague text, the  Pronk text, and text agreed in the technical working groups. On  Thursday, the mechanisms group continued consideration of the Co- Chairs' non-paper. Co-Chair Estrada noted that the draft decisions  on mechanisms had been reformulated to reflect the political  decision. The EU said an error had been made in the decision on  eligibility, which now included reference to the 'legal' agreement  on compliance. Australia, Canada and Japan urged consistency to  reflect the political decision's section on compliance.

In the closing Plenary on Friday, 27 July, Co-Chair Estrada  presented the Co-Chairs' draft decisions on mechanisms  (FCCC/CP/2001/CRP.11). This text represents a work in progress. To  facilitate the future work of parties, a key has been used to  distinguish between: text that was agreed in the high-level  segment; text agreed in the technical groups; text partially  agreed in the technical groups; and text that was either not  agreed or which has not yet been considered. The Plenary took note  of these draft decisions and appendices, which will be further  considered, elaborated and adopted at COP-7.

###     Draft Decisions forwarded to COP-7:

The draft decisions to be  considered further at COP-7 include:a draft decision on principles, nature and scope of the  mechanisms pursuant to Articles 6, 12 and 17; a draft decision on guidelines for the implementation of  Article 6, including an annex setting out the guidelines; a draft decision on modalities and procedures for a clean  development mechanism, as defined in Article 12, including an  annex setting out these modalities and procedures, and several  appendices; and a draft decision on modalities, rules and guidelines for  emissions trading, including an annex.

### LAND USE, LAND-USE CHANGE AND FORESTRY (LULUCF)

LULUCF was  considered in a closed negotiating group co-chaired by Harald  Dovland (Norway) and Philip Gwage (Uganda) from 16-18 July. The  group sought to reduce differences on key outstanding issues,  including whether Article 3.4 (additional activities) should be  allowed during the first commitment period, and options for  limiting the activities; principles governing LULUCF activities;  and Article 3.3 (afforestation, reforestation and deforestation)  and 3.4 definitions and accounting rules. On Article 3.4  activities, some countries opposed their inclusion, stressing that  it represents a renegotiation of the Kyoto targets and undermines  the integrity of the Protocol. Other Parties emphasized that  LULUCF is fundamental to ratification. Canada, Australia and  Japan, joined by the Russian Federation, presented a proposal on  Article 3.4 forest management, which relied on negotiated maximum  levels of forest management credits for individual countries. This  proposal - as well as proposals by New Zealand and the EU - set  the stage for the high-level negotiations. The discussions were  based on the Pronk text as well as text carried over from The  Hague. Based on these and previous discussions, a Note was  prepared by the Co-Chairs of the four negotiating groups  (FCCC/CP/20001/CRP.8) outlining clear options.

During the high-level segment of COP-6 Part II, a closed  negotiating group on LULUCF was facilitated by Raúl Estrada  (Argentina).

###     Bonn Agreement:

The section on LULUCF includes a paragraph  affirming eight governing principles for the treatment of LULUCF  activities:treatment on the basis of sound science; use of consistent methodologies over time for estimation and  reporting of activities; consistency with the aim of Protocol Article 3.1 (quantified  emissions commitments); non-inclusion in accounting of 'mere presence' of carbon  stocks; contribution to biodiversity conservation and sustainable use  of natural resources; accounting that does not imply transfer of commitments to a  future commitment period; accounting at the appropriate time for the reversal of a  removal of carbon from the atmosphere; and exclusion of windfall effects from accounting.

The decision on LULUCF proposes that the Protocol Article 3.3  definitions of 'forest,' 'afforestation,' 'reforestation' and  'deforestation' are based on changes in land use. Debits during  the first commitment period from harvesting following  afforestation and reforestation since 1990 are not to be greater  than credits on the same land. Each Party may choose to apply all  or a selection of additional activities - forest management,  cropland management, grazing land management and revegetation -  under Protocol Article 3.4 during the first commitment period.  These activities must be proven to be human-induced and to have  occurred since 1990.

The decision lays out the following accounting rules for the first  commitment period: net-net accounting for agricultural activities;  accounting for forest management up to the level of a possible  debit under Article 3.3; and negotiated Party caps included in an  Appendix Z for Article 3.4 activities and LULUCF resulting from  joint implementation. The decision further allows LULUCF under the  CDM in the form of afforestation and reforestation only and limits  such credits during the first commitment period.

###     Post-Bonn Agreement Negotiations=The negotiating group met to  develop draft decisions on LULUCF reflecting the political  decision as well as the package of documents previously discussed  in the group. A smaller drafting group co-facilitated by Andreas  Fischlin (Switzerland) and Halldor Thorgeirsson (Iceland) was  convened. Discussions centered around sections where the political  decision was considered ambiguous and where further consultation  was required, including the question of whether eligibility of  LULUCF activities under Article 12 (CDM) is decided only for the  first commitment period, or whether the current decision also  applies to future commitment periods. Other issues included the  Russian Federation proposal for an amendment to its cap on forest  management credits contained in Appendix Z, and additional  concerns regarding Party caps. The drafting group agreed on the  Co-Chairs' draft decisions on Thursday, 26 July, with the  exception of these issues. They were further discussed during  Friday, 27 July, with agreement emerging on a paragraph specifying  that LULUCF activities under the CDM in future commitment periods  shall be decided as part of the negotiations on the second  commitment period. A new paragraph was drafted allowing Parties to  request that the COP reconsider its numerical value in Appendix Z  no later than two years prior to the beginning of the first  commitment period.

On Friday, 27 July, delegates met in Plenary and decided that the  draft LULUCF decisions would be forwarded for further  consideration by, and adoption at, COP-7.

###     Draft decisions forwarded to COP-7:

The draft decisions on LULUCF  (FCCC/CP/2001/L.11/Rev.1) incorporate the Bonn Agreement and  comprise a decision, which, inter alia:requests SBSTA to investigate possible biome-specific forest  definitions and to develop definitions and modalities for  including LULUCF activities under the CDM; and invites the IPCC to elaborate methods to estimate, measure,  monitor and report changes in carbon stocks as relevant to  Articles 3.3 and 3.4 and LULUCF under Articles 6 and 12, and to  prepare a report on good practice guidance and uncertainty  management.

The draft decisions on LULUCF also include a COP/MOP-1 decision.  It contains principles on LULUCF in a preamble, and adopts the  definitions, modalities, rules and guidelines related to LULUCF  under the Protocol, which are contained in an annex, with a  further appendix specifying the Annex I Party maximum credits from  Article 3.4 forest management and LULUCF activities under JI  during the first commitment period.

### COMPLIANCE

Delegates met on Tuesday and Wednesday, 17-18 July, in  a closed negotiating group co-chaired by Harald Dovland (Norway)  and Tuiloma Neroni Slade (Samoa). The group focused on five  issues: the nature and legally binding nature of consequences  applied by the enforcement branch; whether the Compliance  Committee composition would be based on the equitable geographical  distribution of the five UN regional groupings or tailored to the  mandate of the branch and to the type of commitments under  consideration; whether there would be an appeal; whether a COP/MOP  panel would consider the reports of experts review teams; and how  the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and  respective capabilities would affect the design and functioning of  the Compliance Committee.

On Thursday, 19 July, Co-Chair Slade reported to Plenary that a  list of questions with clear options for consideration by the  Ministers had been elaborated (FCCC/CP/20001/CRP.8). He explained  that the group had identified six outstanding issues and suggested  that the resolution of key political issues - the consequences to  be applied by the branches and the composition of those branches -  be given priority.

High-level discussions facilitated by Minister Valli Moosa (South  Africa) took place on Saturday, 21 July. Progress was later  reported to the President's Group on, inter alia, the legally- binding nature of the compliance regime and an emphasis on  facilitation. Late evening Saturday, President Pronk presented a  proposal for a draft decision outlining political agreements on  'core elements' of the BAPA.

The proposal covered eight aspects of the compliance system. Four  elements of the proposal generated the most controversy.

The aim of the consequences of non-compliance to be applied  by the enforcement branch is to restore non-compliance and repair  the damage to the environment.

The enforcement consequences include that payments will be  made to repair the damage to the environment.

The facilitative and enforcement branches shall be composed  of: one member from each of the five UN regional groups and one  member of the SIDS, taking into account the practice of the Bureau  of the UNFCCC; two members from Annex I Parties; and two members  from non-Annex I Parties.

The COP should adopt at its sixth session a legal instrument  on procedures and mechanisms relating to compliance as an integral  part of the Protocol.

Following high-level informal consultations on Saturday through  Monday 21-23 July, during which compliance proved particularly  contentious and difficult to resolve, ministers and other-high  level officials agreed to a text on 23 July. The text provides,  inter alia, that the enforcement consequences shall aim at  ensuring 'environmental integrity,' rather than reparation of the  damage to the environment, and deferring the issue of the mode of  adoption of the compliance regime, and thus of the legally binding  nature of its consequences, to a later stage.

###     Bonn Agreement:

The Bonn Agreement covers eight aspects of the  compliance system. On the mandate of the facilitative branch, the  COP agrees that advice and facilitation shall be provided with the  aim of promoting compliance and providing for early warning of  non-compliance. Such facilitation will cover: quantitative  emission commitments prior to, and during, the commitment period;  and methodological and reporting requirements prior to the  beginning of the first commitment period.

On the consequences of non-compliance to be applied by the  enforcement branch, the COP agrees that these aim at restoring  non-compliance to ensure environmental integrity, and shall  provide for an incentive to comply. Accordingly, enforcement  consequences include: deduction of 1.3 times the excess emissions  from the Party's first commitment period assigned amount, to be  applied to the assigned amount of the second commitment period;  development of a compliance action plan; and suspension of  eligibility to make transfers under Article 17 (emissions  trading).

On the mandate of the enforcement branch, the COP agrees that this  branch shall assess Annex I Parties' compliance with: quantitative  emissions commitments; methodological and reporting requirements  under Article 5.1 (national systems), 5.2 (adjustments), 7.1  (inventories) and 7.2 (guidelines for the communication of  information); and eligibility requirements under Articles 6 (JI),  12 (CDM) and 17 (emissions trading).

On appeal, the COP agrees that there will be a possibility of  appeal to the COP/MOP in case of denial of due process. In such  cases, the decision of the enforcement branch will only be  overridden by a COP/MOP three-fourth majority decision.

On principles, the COP agrees that the principle of common but  differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities shall  be reflected in the design of the compliance system as well as in  the mandate of the facilitative branch. On the composition of the  facilitative and enforcement branches, the COP agrees that both  bodies shall be composed of: one member from each of the five UN  regional groups and one member of the SIDS, taking into account  the practice of the Bureau of the UNFCCC; two members from Annex I  Parties; and two members from non-Annex I Parties.

On decision-making, the COP agrees that, failing consensus,  decisions shall be taken by a three-fourth majority, except in the  case of the enforcement branch where a double majority of Annex I  and non-Annex I Parties will also be required. Finally, on the  adoption of the compliance system, the COP agrees to adopt, at its  sixth session, the procedures and mechanisms relating to  compliance 'as specified above' and to recommend the adoption, by  COP/MOP-1, of such procedures and mechanisms 'in terms of Article  18 of the Kyoto Protocol.' Post-Bonn Agreement Negotiations: On Wednesday, 25 July, Co-Chair  Slade said the Co-Chairs had prepared a non-paper comprising a  draft COP decision and an annex that they hoped would assist  delegates in their further work. Developing countries and many  developed countries welcomed it as providing a good basis for the  group's further work. On Thursday, delegates proceeded through the  Co-Chairs' non-paper on procedures and mechanisms on compliance  under the Protocol. Delegates diverged over the legal and  political interpretation of the Bonn Agreement with regard to the  remaining work to be done on compliance during COP-6 Part II, and  to the legally binding nature of the compliance regime. Developing  countries and many Annex I Parties supported the intervention of  President Pronk on the way forward.

On Friday, 27 July, Co-Chair Slade reported that the discussions  had evidenced different views on some key issues in the Bonn  Agreement. The COP took note of the draft decision on compliance  based on the Co-Chairs' non-paper (FCCC/CP/2001/CRP12/Rev.1), and  decided to forward it to COP-7 for completion and adoption.

###     Draft Decision forwarded to COP-7:

The draft decision contains a  draft COP decision, including a draft COP/MOP-1 decision, and an  annex.

The draft COP decision:decides to adopt the procedures and mechanisms on compliance  under the Protocol annexed thereto; recommends that COP/MOP-1 adopt such procedures and  mechanisms in terms of Protocol Article 18; and recommends that COP/MOP-1 adopt the following draft decision:  COP/MOP-1 confirms the COP decision and brings the procedures and  mechanisms on compliance under the Protocol into operation.

The annex constitutes the procedures and mechanisms on compliance  under the Protocol and includes the elements of the Bonn Agreement  on compliance outlined above. Other key elements of the text  include:the Compliance Committee shall take into account any degree  of flexibility provided by the COP/MOP to the Annex I Parties  undergoing the process to a market economy; members of the Committee will act in their individual  capacities; the Compliance Committee shall apply the guidance received  from the COP/MOP and the COP/MOP shall consider the report of the  Compliance Committee; the facilitative branch shall promote Parties' compliance  with their commitments, taking into account Parties' common but  differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities; submissions to both branches may be made by any Party with  respect to itself or any Party with respect to another Party; the facilitation of financial and technical assistance by the  facilitative branch shall take into account UNFCCC Article 4.3  (financial resources), 4.4 (costs of adaptation) and 4.5  (technology transfer); and in case of non-compliance with Articles 5.1, 5.2, 7.1 or 7.4,  the consequences to be applied by the enforcement branch are:  declaration of non-compliance; and development of a plan analyzing  the causes of non-compliance, measures to remedy non-compliance  and a timetable for the implementation of such measures.

### PROTOCOL ARTICLES 5, 7 AND 8

Due to time constraints, issues  relating to national systems, adjustments and guidelines under  Protocol Articles 5 (methodological issues), 7 (communication of  information) and 8 (review of information) were formally only  addressed in the context of the COP's organizational matters. In  the Plenary on Monday, 16 July, President Pronk indicated that a  negotiating group on these articles might be established later in  the session. In the Plenary on Friday, 20 July, a negotiating  group, chaired by Harald Dovland, was established. In Plenary on  Tuesday, 24 July, the G-77/China said that the work on Articles 5,  7 and 8 should start only after the adoption of the decisions on  the implementation of the BAPA, while Australia and Canada urged  that work on these articles proceed. On Wednesday, 25 July,  President Pronk proposed that delegates focus on their remaining  work in the previously established negotiating groups on finance,  LULUCF, mechanisms, and compliance. Australia, Canada and New  Zealand underlined the importance of Articles 5, 7, and 8, and  urged that this be addressed as soon as possible.

###     Draft Decisions forwarded to COP-7:

During the final Plenary, the  COP took note of the draft decisions on national systems,  adjustments and guidelines under Articles 5, 7 and 8 (CP/2000/5/  Add.3 (Vol. III)) and forwarded them to COP-7 for completion and  adoption.

### ACTIVITIES IMPLEMENTED JOINTLY (AIJ)

This issue was supposed to  be taken up by the SBSTA and the COP. However, due to time  constraints, it was not discussed in-depth by the SBSTA. Parties  decided, at the final COP plenary, to refer the decision as  elaborated during COP-6 Part I (FCCC/CP/2001/2/Add.5) to COP-7 for  adoption in its current form.

###     Draft Decision forwarded to COP-7:

The draft decision takes note  of the fourth synthesis report on AIJ and of the draft revised  uniform reporting format. Under the decision, Parties decide to  continue the pilot phase for AIJ and request the Secretariat to  organize a workshop on the revised uniform reporting format before  SBSTA-15.

### POLICIES AND MEASURES

This matter was taken up by the SBSTA on  Tuesday, 24 July. SBSTA Chair Dovland noted Party views submitted  on the Terms of Reference (TOR) for a proposed workshop on 'best  practices' in policies and measures (P&Ms) among Annex I Parties,  to be concluded at the current SBSTA session. Saudi Arabia,  opposed by the G-77/China, CG-11, the EU, AOSIS and others,  requested that the issue be deferred, as a decision regarding the  workshop had not been officially adopted at COP-6 Part I. Chair  Dovland said he would consult with President Pronk and said  informal consultations on the TOR would be facilitated by José  Romero (Switzerland) and Richard Muyungi (Tanzania).

During the final SBSTA plenary on Friday, 27 July, Parties agreed  on a draft decision (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.4), with minor changes.  José Romero gave feedback on an informal meeting on P&Ms, in which  the TOR were agreed for a workshop to be held in October 2001,  sponsored by Denmark and Norway. Supporting the draft conclusion,  Uruguay requested reference to 'domestic' voluntary agreements.  Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Kuwait, and Jordan - opposed by numerous non  Annex I Parties, as well as Poland, the EU and Japan - objected to  the adoption of the conclusions, arguing that these could not be  adopted until after the formal adoption of the decision on polices  and measures. Saudi Arabia suggested that this decision be  deferred. Denmark and Norway noted that funding of the workshop  was conditional on it being held before COP-7. Overriding the  objections of Saudi Arabia, Chair Dovland ruled that SBSTA was  entitled to decide on holding this workshop. Following a request  from Saudi Arabia, a small group was convened to address concerns  on the text. The small group reached agreement on a decision  (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.4). In accordance with the decision, SBSTA,  inter alia: takes note of submissions by Parties on the TOR of the  proposed workshop; accepts the offer by Denmark and Norway to host  the workshop in October 2001; and decides to consider the report  of the workshop at its fifteenth session.

###     Draft Decision forwarded to COP-7:

During its final Plenary, the  COP further agreed on a draft decision (FCCC/CP/2001/2/Add.5) to  be forwarded to COP-7 for adoption in its current format. The  draft decision decides that future work on P&Ms should contribute  to the improvement of transparency, effectiveness and  comparability of P&Ms, by: enhancing transparency in reporting on  P&Ms in the national communications of Annex I Parties through, as  appropriate, criteria and quantitative parameters; facilitating  information sharing on ways to minimize adverse effects of P&Ms;  and assisting Parties in identifying further options for  cooperation between Annex I Parties to enhance the individual and  combined effectiveness of their P&Ms. The COP also decides that  future work should contribute to the elaboration of elements for  reporting information on demonstrable progress.

### IMPACT OF SINGLE PROJECTS ON EMISSIONS IN THE COMMITMENT PERIOD

Due to time constraints, this issue was not discussed in-depth  during SBSTA. Parties decided at the final COP plenary to refer  the decision (FCCC/CP/2001/2/Add.5), as elaborated during COP-6  Part I, for adoption in its current format at COP-7.

###     Draft Decision forwarded to COP-7:

The draft decision defines a  single project and sets the guidelines for reporting CO2 emissions  from a single project that has come into operation since 1990.

## ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL MATTERS

Delegates took up the matter of the institutional linkage of the  UNFCCC Secretariat to the United Nations in the SBI on 24 and 27  July, and agreed to recommend to the COP a draft decision on this  matter based on a Note by the Executive Secretary.

###     Final Decision:

The decision (FCCC/CP/2001/L.8) was adopted by the  COP on Friday, 27 July. The decision notes that the linkage  continues to provide a sound basis for the functioning of the  Secretariat, and that UNFCCC conference servicing is being met  from the UN regular budget. It approves the continuation of the  current institutional linkage for an additional five-year period,  to be reviewed by the General Assembly and the COP before 31  December 2006, invites the Secretary-General to seek the same  endorsement from the General Assembly at its upcoming 56th  session, and invites it to decide also on the issue of conference  servicing expenses.

## OTHER MATTERS

During the COP Plenary held Friday, 27 July, the COP considered  draft conclusions proposed by Canada (FCCC/CP/2001/CRP.13)  relating to its offer to hold an informal meeting on optimizing  the uptake of cleaner or less greenhouse gas emitting energy, and  inviting the Secretariat to convene a workshop on this issue prior  to COP-8, and SBSTA-16 to develop recommendations for COP-8 to  consider.

Several countries, including Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Algeria,  expressed concern at the lack of time to consider the proposal,  and suggested considering the Canadian proposal at COP-7. However,  many Parties, including Japan, Argentina, Senegal, Palau and  Malaysia, supported the text. Delegates agreed to a compromise  whereby reference to a workshop organized by the Secretariat, and  recommendations by SBSTA-16 to COP-8, were deleted.

###     Final Conclusion:

The text, as adopted, recognizes that cleaner or  less greenhouse gas emitting energy, particularly renewables,  hydro, geothermal and natural gas, can promote environmental  benefits to meet the objects of the UNFCCC and Kyoto Protocol, and  optimize the uptake of cleaner or less greenhouse gas emitting  energy. It also takes note of Canada's offer to convene an  informal workshop on this matter, and report on the outcome to  SBSTA-15.

## REPORTS OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES

The subsidiary bodies to the UNFCCC met for their fourteenth  sessions from 24-27 July. On Tuesday, 24 July, the Subsidiary Body  for Implementation (SBI) and the Subsidiary Body for Scientific  and Technological Advice (SBSTA) met separately to begin their  work by addressing most of their agenda items. These meetings were  followed by a number of informal consultations held from 24-26  July, which resulted in draft conclusions adopted by the two  subsidiary bodies in meetings held on Friday, 27 July. Issues  addressed by these texts include, for the SBI, administrative and  financial matters, and, for SBSTA, scientific and methodological  aspects of the proposal by Brazil, policies and measures among  Annex I Parties, and cooperation with relevant organizations. The  subsidiary bodies both adopted their reports on the session on 27  July (FCCC/SBI/2001/L.1 and FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.1). The following  section outlines issues addressed by these two bodies that the COP  did not specifically address or take a separate decision on.

### SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION

On Tuesday, 24 July, the SBI,  chaired by John Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda), adopted its agenda.

###     Reports on Inter-sessional Activities:

Delegates considered  reports on inter-sessional activities on 24 and 27 July  (FCCC/SBI/2001/L.1). In particular, they considered further work  concerning LDCs, work on the Consultative Group of Experts (CGE)  on non-Annex I communications, and ongoing activities on reporting  and review of greenhouse gas inventories in Annex I Parties.

On further work concerning the LDCs, the SBI heard a report from  Uganda, speaking on behalf of the coordinator for LDCs, on the  technical input given to the Third UN Conference on the LDCs,  which was held in Brussels in May 2001. He said that the Programme  of Action that was adopted at this conference includes specific  mention of the urgent need to address global environmental  concerns on the basis of the principle of common but  differentiated responsibilities. It also highlights the low  adaptive capacity of LDCs to the adverse effects of climate  change. Delegates also considered the development of guidelines  for the preparation of national adaptation programmes of actions  (NAPAs). Tuvalu, for the LDCs, reported on a workshop on this  issue, underlining some progress on the establishment of the  guidelines. He said more work was needed and proposed a workshop  in the Maldives, before COP-7, to further develop NAPA guidelines.  The SBI took note of these reports. It also thanked the Maldives  for an offer to host the NAPA workshop.

Regarding the work of the Consultative Group of Experts (CGE) on  National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I, the  SBI heard a preliminary report on 24 July from Group Chair Vute  Wangwacharakul (Thailand). He noted that, in an examination of 50  national communications, the Group had identified a number of  problems that may be addressed, inter alia, through the provision  of adequate financial and technical assistance. The G-77/China  said the recommendations of the CGE were based only on a limited  number of national communications, and that a more comprehensive  aggregate analysis was needed, while the US said such  recommendations should form the basis for the development of new  guidelines for national communications to be adopted at COP-7.  Following these statements, a Friends of the Chair group,  facilitated by Philip Weech (Bahamas), was convened to consider  the CGE's preliminary report. The SBI subsequently adopted the  draft conclusions on this matter (FCCC/SBI/2001/CRP.2), which  invites Parties to submit their views on the CGE's preliminary  report, and on the current progress on the process to improve  guidelines for subsequent non-Annex I national communications. The  date set for receipt of these views is 15 September 2001. The  conclusions request the Secretariat to compile these submissions  and prepare a consolidated report on the matter for SBI-15.

Regarding ongoing activities on reporting and review of greenhouse  gas inventories in Annex I Parties, the US suggested, in the SBI  on 24 July, a more comprehensive testing of the guidelines by all  Parties during the trial period and that revised guidelines be  adopted at COP-8. SBI Chair Ashe said SBSTA-15 will have a  substantive consideration of this agenda item. The SBI took note  of the oral report on the ongoing and planned activities on this  issue.

###     Administrative and Financial Matters:

SBI considered the financial  performance for 2000-2001 on 24 and 27 July. The Secretariat  highlighted that a revised indicative list of contributions was  presented for 2001 (FCCC/SBI/2001/INF.2), pursuant to the adoption  by the UN General Assembly in 2000 of a revised scale of  assessments. The G-77/China said the General Assembly resolution  does not automatically apply to the UNFCCC. The Secretariat also  presented the latest status of contributions  (FCCC/SBI/2001/INF.3/Rev.1) and noted the special annual  contribution of DM3.5 million made by the host government,  Germany. Several Parties expressed the concern that their  contributions were not reflected in the list. On 27 July, the SBI  took note of the revised scale of contributions and of the latest  status of contributions and expressed appreciation to those  Parties making their core contributions in a timely manner, and to  those making voluntary contributions.

The SBI took up the matter of the programme budget for the  biennium 2002-2003 on 24 July, when UNFCCC Executive Secretary  Cutajar outlined details of the proposed programme budget. He  noted that the formal adoption of the budget is scheduled for COP- 7. He said income would include indicative contributions of  US$27.5 million, in addition to the host government's contribution  and carry-over from previous periods. Delegates subsequently met  in a small closed group, chaired by John Ashe, to continue  discussions in greater detail. In the SBI meeting on 27 July, the  G-77/China stressed the principle of equitable geographic  representation among the staff. Japan noted that discussion on the  programme budget is not closed and will continue at SBI-15. The  SBI took note of the budget report.

On implementation of the Headquarters Agreement, UNFCCC Executive  Secretary Cutajar informed the SBI on 24 July of the need to move  an increasing number of staff to temporary accommodations, as the  Secretariat continues to grow. An initial offer by the German  Government for part of the former Bundeshaus complex was deemed  insufficient to meet ongoing needs. However, he hoped the  situation would be resolved shortly. Some progress on visas and  other issues was also noted. Germany highlighted its commitment to  guarantee adequate accommodation and the best possible working  conditions for UN personnel. He said talks are ongoing to  accommodate all UN organizations in Bonn in a single location.  Argentina expressed concern at these visa and accommodation  difficulties. He suggested a small committee might be established  to consider these issues, without being involved in micro- management. Germany said most difficulties have been addressed  during the past year and a half, and they will take all steps  necessary to deal with problems as they arise. Canada noted  Argentina's 'interesting' proposal but indicated some  reservations. In the SBI meeting held on 27 July delegates thanked  the host government for its efforts concerning the provision of  acceptable office accommodations, and invited it to continue  negotiations with the Secretariat to resolve this issue as soon as  possible. The SBI also requested a progress report on this and  other relevant matters at SBI-15.

On the juridical personality of the Secretariat on the  international plane, the Secretariat noted that its UN  institutional linkage had enabled it to function without an  international juridical personality, and that it did have a  juridical personality in Germany. The SBI decided that it would  revisit the matter at a future date if it was deemed necessary  that the Secretariat be vested with a juridical personality on the  international plane.

###     Other Matters:

The SBI took note of a proposed workshop on  adaptation planned for the last quarter of 2001, to be convened by  AOSIS.

###     Adoption of the Report:

The SBI adopted the report on its  fourteenth session on Friday morning, 27 July (FCCC/SBI/2001/L.1).  Chair Ashe thanked participants for their support, and closed the  meeting shortly before 12:00 pm.

### SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE

The  fourteenth session of the SBSTA began its work on Tuesday, 24  July, chaired by Harald Dovland (Norway). At its first meeting,  the SBSTA adopted its agenda.

###     Reports on Inter-sessional Activities:

Delegates considered this  issue on 24 and 27 July, and took note of, or adopted conclusions  on: emissions resulting from fuel use in international  transportation; methods and tools to evaluate impacts and  adaptation; issues related to emissions from forest harvesting and  wood products; progress related to a technology information  system; and UNFCCC Article 6 (education, training and public  awareness) (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.1).

On emissions resulting from fuel used in international  transportation, the Secretariat highlighted inter-sessional work,  as contained in a joint report with the International Civil  Aviation Organization (ICAO) and the International Maritime  Organization. The EU expressed concern about rising emissions from  air transportation and noted that ICAO is scheduled to meet in  September with a view to reaching decisions on this question.

On 24 July, the Secretariat reported on a workshop on methods and  tools to assess climate change impacts and adaptation, held  recently in Canada. On 27 July, the SBSTA took note of the  workshop and invited Parties to consider the issue further, and to  submit views on issues identified in a report on the workshop  (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/INF.4) by 1 October 2001, for compilation by the  Secretariat.

On issues related to emissions from forest harvesting and wood  products, New Zealand reported, on 24 July, on a workshop for  estimating and accounting for carbon dioxide emissions from forest  harvesting and wood products, and said it is coordinating a  further study. The SBSTA decided to consider this matter further  at its fifteenth session.

On progress related to a technology information system, Chair  Dovland informed the SBSTA, on 24 July, that the system is being  regularly updated, and that Parties interested in testing the  system should contact the Secretariat. On 27 July, delegates  decided to consider the matter further at SBSTA-15.

On UNFCCC Article 6, the EU, supported by many other Parties,  outlined a proposal to the SBSTA on 24 July, to consider further  work. Australia supported the dissemination of the IPCC TAR  results in a manner accessible to the public. On 27 July,  delegates adopted conclusions on this matter  (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.5), in which the SBSTA: thanked the Secretariat  for its report on this issue, and welcomed the preparation of a  further document for SBSTA-15; noted that Article 6 should be a  substantive item on SBSTA's future agenda, and that a workshop  might be considered following SBSTA-15; and noted the importance  of disseminating the information contained in the IPCC's reports  in more than the six UN languages, requesting the Secretariat to  liaise with the IPCC on this.

###     Scientific and Methodological Aspects of the Proposal by Brazil:

The SBSTA took up this matter on 24 July. On Brazil's proposal on  reductions toward an overall emission ceiling for Annex I Parties  allocated on the basis of each Party's relative share of  responsibility for climate change, Chair Dovland said a workshop  had been held to identify scientific and methodological aspects of  the proposal. The EU noted progress in addressing the technical  basis of the proposal, but identified several outstanding issues.  Several developing countries warned that the work should not go  beyond the COP's mandate. The US noted the workshop's narrow  focus, called for consideration of other models and indicators,  and supported continued research. Chair Dovland said informal  consultations on draft conclusions would be undertaken by David  Warrilow (UK) and Luis Gylvan Meira Filho (Brazil).

On 27 July, Warrilow reported to the SBSTA on the informal  consultations, noting that the group had been unable to reach  consensus on the timing of future work. Brazil proposed that a  side event on this issue be held at COP-7. He noted that a number  of non-Annex I Parties thought it would be useful to have a  workshop before SBSTA-16, focusing specifically on the scientific  and methodological aspects. Delegates then considered the draft  conclusions prepared on this matter (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.2). Saudi  Arabia, supported by Venezuela and China, suggested that this  issue only be addressed before SBSTA-18. The EU and Argentina  urged that the meeting be held sooner. Following discussion in a  small informal group, SBSTA agreed that it will take up the matter  for discussion at SBSTA-16. Reference to SBSTA deciding on future  action at this sixteenth session was deleted. Another amendment  was accepted in terms of which SBSTA requests the Secretariat to  review this proposal and facilitate dissemination of scientific  and methodological information on this proposal.

The conclusions were accepted, as amended. In the conclusions, the  SBSTA: recalls that COP-3 decided that Brazil's proposal should be  referred to the SBSTA; take notes of a progress report on the  issue; and encourages Parties to support the research effort on  scientific and methodological aspects of the proposal.

###     Cooperation with Relevant International Organizations:

At the  SBSTA meeting on 24 July, Chair Dovland noted ongoing initiatives  between the UNFCCC and the Convention on Biological Diversity  (CBD), including: a CBD discussion note and responses submitted by  the UNFCCC Parties; a CBD Ad Hoc Technical Expert Group to carry  out a pilot assessment on advice to integrate biodiversity into  UNFCCC implementation; and a proposed joint liaison group between  the two Secretariats. Jan Plesnik, Chair of the CBD Subsidiary  Body on Scientific, Technical and Technological Advice, reported  on initiatives in the CBD to address interlinkages between  biodiversity and climate change. Bob Watson, IPCC Chair, reported  on the preparation of an IPCC Technical Paper on linkages between  climate and biodiversity.

The SBSTA then invited Ian Carruthers (Australia) and Jimena Nieto  Carrasco (Colombia) to undertake informal consultations on this  matter in order to help formulate draft conclusions. On 27 July,  the SBSTA adopted conclusions on this matter  (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.3).

On cooperation with other conventions, the conclusions emphasize  the need for cooperation with other relevant conventions,  including the CBD, and endorsed the formation of a joint liaison  group between the UNFCCC and CBD Secretariats. It also invited the  Secretariat of the UN Convention to Combat Desertification to  participate in this group, in order to explore options for further  cooperation, including the possibility of a joint work plan and/or  workshop. Parties are invited to submit their further views on  cooperation between the three conventions by 15 October 2001. A  request by the CBD that IPCC develop a paper to consider relevant  interlinkages was endorsed.

Regarding cooperation with scientific organizations, the SBSTA  commended the IPCC on the high quality of the Third Assessment  Report. It also noted that support is needed for workshop planned  by the Global Climate Observing System for the Caribbean and  Central American and Asia regions in 2002.

###     Adoption of the Report:

The SBSTA adopted the report on its  fourteenth session on Friday afternoon, 27 July  (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.1).

## CLOSING PLENARY

The closing Plenary took place on Friday evening, 27 July 2001.  COP-6 President Pronk addressed delegates, stating that this  meeting advanced the implementation of the UNFCCC and brought the  Protocol closer to reality, as agreed under the BAPA. The COP then  adopted a number of decisions relating to the agenda items on  organizational, administrative and financial, and other matters,  as well as on the implementation of the BAPA.

After hearing reports from the Co-Chairs of the negotiating groups  on progress in recent days, President Pronk noted that delegates  had now come close to adopting a balanced 'package' of decisions  on all issues under the BAPA. However, as a few outstanding items  remained unfinished, the draft decisions would all be forwarded to  COP-7 for final adoption. He pointed out that agreement had been  reached on ten decisions, including those on financial issues,  meaning their adoption at COP-7 would be a formality. Outstanding  issues include texts on guidelines under Protocol Articles 5, 7  and 8, compliance, the mechanisms and LULUCF. The COP took note of  progress made and agreed to forward texts to COP-7 for final  elaboration and adoption.

President Pronk highlighted his aims of encouraging intensive work  on the texts, safeguarding the integrity of the political decision  - or 'Bonn Agreement' on fulfilling the BAPA - and ensuring a fair  process. He thanked delegates for their hard work, and said he has  received confirmation from all groups that completion of the work  will take place at COP-7 in way that is faithful to the Bonn  Agreement. He added that the Bonn Agreement will make the Protocol  ratifiable.

President Pronk praised the Bonn Agreement and the other  achievements at this session as an outcome of dialogue, mutual  understanding, and compromise, and evidence of the value of  multilateral negotiations. He reminded delegates of their promise  at the end of The Hague session not to wait another year to  succeed with their negotiations, and said he was proud of the  results achieved in Bonn. He expressed confidence that the  remaining work, which is non-political, will be concluded at COP- 7.

The COP then adopted the report of the session (FCCC/CP/2001/L.1  and Add.1).

Following this, Parties then made closing statements. Many thanked  President Pronk for his significant contribution to the outcome of  the resumed COP-6, and also expressed their gratitude to UNFCCC  Executive Secretary Michael Zammit Cutajar and his staff.

Iran, on behalf of the G-77/China, said the Group had come to Bonn  to finish unfinished work, and thanked all participants for the  positive atmosphere of cooperation and understanding. On matters  relating to compliance, he indicated that the G-77/China welcomed  the Co-Chairs'non-paper (FCCC/CP/2001/CRP12/Rev.1) as a good basis  for discussions, and said the adoption of legally binding  consequences remained a major objective for the Group.

Bulgaria, for CG-11, urged Parties to continue to demonstrate the  flexibility and goodwill evident in Bonn at COP-7. Samoa, for  AOSIS, said the resumed COP-6 outcomes have breathed new life into  the Protocol, adding that delegates have taken an historic step  towards creating an environmentally responsible, carbon restrained  world. He indicated his appreciation to those Annex I countries  involved in the Political Declaration on new and additional  funding assistance. While noting that the Protocol is 'only a  modest first step,' he highlighted its key role as offering 'the  only viable lifeline.' Belgium, for the EU, said the Bonn Agreement lays a foundation for  the successful conclusion of these ongoing negotiations. He said  he was hopeful that a balanced and comprehensive package of  decisions will be achieved at COP-7.

Australia welcomed the significant progress since the 'historic'  Bonn Agreement on Monday, 23 July. He noted with satisfaction  agreement on issues such as finance and technology transfer, and  looked forward to completing work on all outstanding texts at COP- 7.

Vanuatu, on behalf of the LDCs, welcomed in particular text on  UNFCCC Article 4.8 and 4.9. He highlighted the need to involve  youth and their spokespeople in the process. Japan stressed the  progress in talks over recent days, while noting that much remains  to be done to bridge differences on compliance, the mechanisms and  LULUCF. He said Parties should strive to complete work on all  outstanding issues at COP-7. New Zealand said it came to Bonn to  say 'yes' to an agreement. He said the Bonn Agreement has provided  such an affirmation, and removed remaining questions surrounding  the ratifiability of the Protocol. Morocco extended a welcome to  Parties to continue at Marrakech the achievements in Bonn.  President Pronk declared the resumed COP-6 closed at 10:30 pm.

# A BRIEF ANALYSIS OF COP-6 PART II

Confounding the predictions of many, the gavel came down late  Monday morning - midway through the two week meeting - and  delegates rose in a standing ovation to complete a marathon  weekend of negotiations and seal what many saw as an 'historic'  political agreement that saved the Kyoto Protocol. Few climate  pundits had predicted a positive outcome in Bonn, and it was thus  not surprising that praise on reaching a political agreement was  effusive. Michael Meacher, UK Minister for the Environment,  described it as 'a brilliant day for the environment'; Peter  Hodgson, New Zealand's Energy Minister, said 'we have delivered  probably the most comprehensive and difficult agreement in  history'; and an NGO campaigner said that 'this first small step  is a giant leap for humanity and for the future of our planet.' Four days later, when President Pronk formally closed COP-6 Part  II late on Friday evening, the euphoria was far more muted. Not  only were observers coming to appreciate the nature of the  sacrifices made to achieve this agreement, but - more importantly  - differences had appeared in the interpretation of Monday's  groundbreaking agreement. At one stage, shortly after most of the  world's press had retired home comfortable in the belief that an  agreement had been secured, it appeared as if the entire package  was in danger of unraveling, with the Russian Federation and other  Umbrella Group members flexing their muscles and disputing the  terms of the agreement. This development, coupled with the failure  to reach closure on certain key issues - notably compliance - was  a sobering reminder that ratification of the Protocol is not yet  assured, nor is its environmental integrity guaranteed.

## 'THE ONLY GAME IN TOWN'

Notwithstanding these concerns, the achievement of the last two  weeks should not be underestimated. Expectations of delivery at  Bonn had been low. In the words of one observer, 'only  professional optimists' were predicting success, with some  commentators forecasting the end of the Protocol and 'a descent  into environmental anarchy.' President Pronk had set himself an  ambitious agenda, and the initial prognosis was not good. Since  the collapse of talks in The Hague, the US had pronounced the  Protocol 'fatally flawed' and withdrawn from the process, leaving  Pronk with no viable alternative but to broker a deal that was  sufficiently attractive to Japan and the Russian Federation, while  at the same time maintaining the commitment of the EU and  developing countries. Despite an active round of shuttle  diplomacy, and a number of preliminary high-level meetings, there  was no evidence prior to Bonn that the gulf of disagreement had  been bridged. Midway through the first week of the Bonn talks, and  shortly before the arrival of ministers, this gulf was still  apparent.

It is against this backdrop of significant political divisions,  and low expectations, that the euphoria of Monday's agreement  should be seen. Despite the significant compromises that were  made, the agreement is nevertheless hugely significant in that it  has affirmed President Pronk's long stated assertion that the  Protocol is the 'only game in town.'

## 'KYOTO LITE' - TAKING THE FIRST STEP

COP 6 Part II will be remembered primarily for having produced the  'Bonn Agreement,' a political commitment on a package of issues  that has facilitated ratification of the Kyoto Protocol. While to  some observers the Bonn Agreement 'falls far short of the lofty  goals contained in the original Kyoto proposal,' leading one NGO  to refer to the agreement as 'Kyoto Lite,' there was nevertheless  general support, even among some of the more skeptical NGOs, that  a weak agreement was better than none.

The following is a brief analysis of some of the key elements  negotiated under the Bonn Agreement, and in talks on The Hague  texts.

###     Finance:

While the financial issues group was the only one to  approve all of its draft decisions, there were diverging views on  the final outcome. Although the agreement recognizes the need for  'new and additional funding,' and establishes three new funds, no  specific funding level is identified and there are no new legal  requirements on countries to provide funding. Pronk's suggested  US$1 billion became an unrealistic option with US withdrawal from  the Protocol.

The Kyoto Protocol adaptation fund is funded by a CDM levy and  voluntary contributions. From a developing country perspective,  the texts mirror the compromise that they made in the Bonn  Agreement, under which they lost out on their previous insistence  on mandatory funding levels or any setting of funding levels. As  one developing country delegate expressed it 'They have shown us  the blank checks, now the question is will they actually enter any  figures.'

### LULUCF

The collapse of The Hague negotiations was attributed by  many observers to disagreements over LULUCF issues: 'It was sinks  that sunk The Hague.' In contrast, the negotiations in Bonn on  LULUCF issues proved to be comparatively straightforward. There  are several reasons for this. Some suggest that negotiators came  to Bonn conscious of the fact that sinks were fatal to The Hague  deal, and, with greater pressure to conclude a package, they had  an increased willingness to compromise. Ironically, the compromise  that was struck was one some noted would have satisfied the US in  The Hague.

With the US now out of the picture, the EU and G-77/China had to  make significant sacrifices to keep the rest of the Umbrella Group  on board, particularly in light of statements by Canada, Australia  and Japan that the provision of credits under Article 3.4 was the  key to ratification. An apparent trade-off for greater EU  flexibility on sinks was the insistence that nuclear energy be  removed from the CDM. While the EU's shift on sinks was a major  concession, and one that revived concerns regarding loopholes and  the renegotiation of the Protocol targets, most saw this as a  necessary and beneficial trade-off for keeping the Protocol alive.

Commentators also observed that Amb. Estrada - well-known for  forging agreements and producing results - had been brought in to  chair discussions during the ministerial session, and suggested  that his touch may have been evident. The resulting agreement was  not without controversy, however. Shortly after the ministers'  decision was agreed, but before it was formally adopted, the  Russian Federation sought to increase the level of credit they  could claim under forest management. Finding a solution for this  apparent impasse, which some saw as threatening the entire  process, required frantic scrambling to enable formal adoption of  the Bonn Agreement.

###     Mechanisms:

Clarifying the nature and scope of the Kyoto  mechanisms has always been one of the key determinants for  ratification of the Kyoto Protocol by Annex I Parties. Although  delegates were unable to resolve all of the technical issues and  produce a clean text, they nevertheless laid a solid foundation  for a positive outcome at COP-7. Key to this was the political  agreement that was reached on the identified 'core issues,'  including supplementarity, eligibility, share of proceeds, the  composition of the executive board, and sinks and nuclear  facilities in the CDM. Agreement was also reached on technical  issues such as baselines and additionality, small-scale CDM  project activities, environmental impact assessments, public  participation, and review by the executive board. As with a number  of the other key issues, the EU made several important compromises  on its previously stated positions, most notably on sinks. While  they may seek some solace in the text on nuclear facilities, and  parts of the text on eligibility requirements, it is evident that  the desire to ensure the participation of key Umbrella Group  countries greatly outweighed their aspirations for a stronger  Protocol.

###     Compliance:

For seasoned observers of the compliance negotiations,  developments in Bonn were unexpected. Following the solid progress  on this issue in The Hague, many expected that the Bonn  negotiations would be comparatively straightforward. The opening  days in Bonn dashed such optimistic forecasts, and served as a  rude reminder to delegates that 'nothing is agreed until  everything is agreed.' While most delegates left The Hague  believing that the compliance regime would be legally binding and  would provide for clear deterrent consequences along the lines  proposed by the EU and developing countries, they soon realized in  Bonn that even these core elements were forcefully disputed. A key  reason for this change was the US withdrawal from the  negotiations. This resulted in a significant shift in bargaining  leverage on those key positions where, in the past, the US had  sided with the EU and the G-77/China, rather than with other  members of the Umbrella Group. The absence of US participation on  these key issues, coupled with the need to ensure ratification in  particular by the Russian Federation and Japan, resulted in a  shift in bargaining power towards those positions favored by the  other Umbrella Group members. This was particularly apparent in  discussions on the legally-binding nature of enforcement  consequences, an issue that the US, EU, Canada and the G-77/China  had all supported in The Hague, and where the preference of  Australia, Japan and the Russian Federation for a 'politically  binding' compliance regime was a minority view apparently with  little chance of success. The US withdrawal, and the need for  ratification by a suitable combination of these three countries,  dramatically influenced the diplomatic negotiating landscape.

The impact of this change was most clearly evidenced during the  final stages of the high-level segment, where the issue of  compliance constituted the major stumbling block for reaching a  political agreement, necessitating late night calls to capitals  and resulting in several amendments to the original Pronk 'core  elements' proposal. Unfortunately, the compromise amendment  relating to the mode of adoption of the compliance regime, and its  link with the legally binding nature of the compliance regime,  later proved to be ambiguous, with major disagreement arising over  its interpretation. During the final meetings of the compliance  negotiating group, numerous amendments were proposed to the  technical text by Australia, Japan, Canada and the Russian  Federation, which some suggest has 'effectively unraveled any  progress' that had been made on compliance during the previous few  years. The outcome of these meetings left some delegates openly  expressing 'deep disappointment and frustration.' Despite not completing its work on compliance, COP-6 Part II made  significant advances. These include the elaboration by the Co- Chairs of an unbracketed non-paper that will serve as the basis  for the resumed negotiations at COP-7, as well as securing  political consensus on several key issues of a compliance system,  including a breakthrough regarding the composition of the  Compliance Committee.

## 'PLAY IT, (UNCLE) SAM.'

As climate change observers look ahead to COP-7 in Morocco - a  country synonymous to many with Bogart, Bergman and Casablanca - a  question uppermost on the minds of many is the extent to which the  US will be persuaded to join the climate caravan.  Will the US  play it, 'as time goes by?' Although the US was noticeably less intrusive in Bonn - seemingly  sticking to their commitment not to prevent others from moving  ahead - their presence was nevertheless ubiquitous. While some  observers claim to have seen the hand of the US in various  submissions by other Parties (most notably that by Nigeria on  eligibility during the first week of negotiations) their impact on  the negotiations was far more pervasive than indulging in a little  backroom lobbying.

For many observers, an overriding objective of the Bonn meeting  was to defy the US, by demonstrating that the Protocol could  survive without its participation. This sentiment was most evident  during the high-level plenary on Monday, 23 July, when the current  spokesperson for the G-77/China stated that the political  agreement was a 'triumph for multilateralism over unilateralism.'  This thinly veiled attack on the US position, which was warmly  applauded by the packed conference hall, was further underlined by  President Pronk. Noting the growing sentiment against  globalization, typified by the G-8 protests in Genoa, Pronk  stressed that the Bonn Agreement demonstrates 'the centrality of  the concept of international cooperation for the higher common  benefit of the global community.' US head of delegation, Paula Dobriansky, appeared unmoved and -  despite being heckled - was unapologetic in reiterating the US  position against ratification. Interestingly though, she referred  to the Protocol as 'not sound policy,' a shift from earlier  statements that it was 'fatally flawed' (and a subtle shift too  from her original written statement, in which she apparently  deleted reference to 'deeply flawed').

While it remains unlikely that the US position on ratification  will change in the near future, there is no doubt that the Bonn  Agreement has affected the international political economy of  climate change. As European Environment Commissioner Margot  Wallstrom put it shortly after the deal had been struck: 'I think  something has changed today in the balance of power between the US  and the EU.' Or as one US observer said: 'this is a major foreign  policy defeat for President Bush.' The nature of the changing relationship was underlined by  President Pronk in his final press conference, late Friday night,  where he emphasized that the US no longer speaks of the Protocol  as being dead. He also noted that the US business community and  various Senators are beginning to appreciate that isolation on  this issue will have an impact on US economic interests. With  ratification of the Kyoto Protocol now more likely, he suggested  that there is now an increased possibility that 'it won't take  many years before there is at least a 'joint track' approach with  the US in addressing climate change.'

## THE BONN AGREEMENT: 'THE BEGINNING OF A BEAUTIFUL FRIENDSHIP?'

Despite the significant achievement in reaching political  consensus, it became apparent towards the end of the Bonn meeting  that not all Parties were 'maintaining the spirit of Monday's  historic agreement.' This was most evident in the varying  interpretations offered on the legally binding nature of the  compliance regime. Some observers have questioned the motives  behind the increasingly evident collaboration between Canada, the  Russian Federation, Australia and Japan, even on issues upon which  individual interests were not at stake.

While it is unlikely that - in the words of Humphrey Bogart - the  Bonn Agreement will necessarily be the beginning of a beautiful  friendship, it is clear that it has laid the foundation for  possible ratification of the Kyoto Protocol. In his closing  statement, Raúl Estrada, one of the chief architects of the Kyoto  Protocol, underlined that COP-6 Part II has brought a 'new  dynamism to the Protocol process, and served to give new weight in  our endeavors towards prompt ratification.' But as the  disagreements in the final few days of the Bonn meeting showed,  there is no guarantee just yet that the Protocol will be ratified,  and if so, at what cost to its environmental integrity.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR BEFORE COP-7

International Energy ProgramME Evaluation Conference: This  conference will be held from 21-24 August 2001, in Salt Lake City,  Utah, US. Presentations will consider energy technologies and  services, and outline the impacts of public and private energy  programmes, as well as products and services, targeted at  industrial, commercial, residential and low-income markets. For  more information, contact: Mary McCarthy Hall, Conference  Coordinator; tel: +1-608-835-6880; fax: +1-608-835-6881; e-mail:  marymcc@tdsnet.com; Internet: http://www.iepec.org

### FIFTH UNCTAD/EARTH COUNCIL POLICY FORUM ON TRADE AND CLIMATE  CHANGE - THE STATE OF THE GREENHOUSE GASES MARKET

This workshop  will take place in association with the International Emissions  Trading Association from 29-31 August 2001, in Rio de Janeiro,  Brazil. The forum will bring together public and private sector  representatives from North and South to discuss climate change  related issues. Participation is by invitation only. For more  information, contact: Lucas Assunção or Gao Pronove, tel: +41-22- 917-5853/5831; fax: +41-22-907-0247; e-mail:  lucas_assuncao@hotmail.com or gao@govida.net; Internet:  http://www.unctad.org/ghg

### INTERNATIONAL EMINENT PERSONS' MEETING ON INTER-LINKAGES

This  meeting, providing input to the 2002 World Summit on Sustainable  Development, will convene from 3-4 September 2001, in Tokyo. The  topic of the meeting, which is being jointly organized by United  Nations University, the Ministries of Foreign Affairs and  Environment of Japan and the Global Legislators Organization for a  Balanced Environment (GLOBE) will be 'Strategies for bridging  problems and solutions to work towards sustainable development.'  For more information, contact: Jerry Velasquez, United Nations  University; tel: +81-3-5467-1301; fax: +81-3-3407-8164; e-mail:  jerry@geic.or.jp; Internet: http://www.unu.edu or  http://www.geic.or.jp/ Emissions MarketIng Association FIFth Annual Fall Meeting and  International Conference: This meeting will be held from 30  September - 2 October 2001, in South Carolina, US. Topics will  include: voluntary carbon dioxide commitments/GHG trading pilots;  international perspectives on COP-7; state and provincial actions  on climate change (focus on registries); state-based multi- pollutant legislation; emissions portfolio risk management in a  dynamic market; SO2 and Nox emissions trading trends; system  design; and legal issues. For more information, contact: David  Feldner, Emissions Marketing Association Executive Director; tel:  +1-414-276-3819; e-mail: dfeldner@emissions.org; Internet:  http://www.emissions.org/conferences/default.html

### 18TH SESSION OF THE IPCC PLENARY

This meeting will be held from  24-29 September 2001, in London, UK. The purpose of the meeting is  to adopt/approve the Synthesis Report. For more information,  contact: Renate Christ, IPCC Secretariat, tel: +41-22-730-8574;  fax: +41-22-730-8025; e-mail: christ_r@gateway.wmo.ch; Internet:  http://www.ipcc.ch/

### 13TH MEETING OF THE PARTIES TO THE MONTREAL PROTOCOL

MOP-13 will  be held in Colombo, Sri Lanka, from 15-19 October 2001. For more  information, contact: Ozone Secretariat; tel: +254-2-62-1234; fax:  +254-2-62-3601; Internet: http://www.unep.org/ozone/

### 17TH EUROPEAN PHOTO-VOLTAIC SOLAR ENERGY CONFERENCE AND  EXHIBITION

This conference will be held from 22-26 October 2001,  in Munich, Germany. Subjects to be addressed include:  fundamentals, novel devices and new materials; crystalline silicon  solar cells; photo-voltaic systems technology; and use of photo- voltaic by developing countries. For more information contact:  WIP; tel: +49-89-720-1235; fax: +49-89-720-1291; e-mail:   wip@wip-munich.de; Internet:   http://www.wip-munich.de/conferences/pv/munich_2001/munich.html

### INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON ARCTIC FEEDBACKS TO GLOBAL CHANGE

This  symposium will be held from 25-27 October 2001, in Rovaniemi,  Finland. It is sponsored by the Nordic Arctic Research Programme  and the Academy of Finland, and will feature a summary of Global  Climate Model results for the Arctic, including in relation to the  marine sector, terrestrial ecosystems, freshwater ecosystems and  icecaps/glaciers. For more information, contact: Peter Kuhry; tel:  +358-16-341-2758; e-mail: peter.kuhry@urova.fi

### SEVENTH CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE UN FRAMEWORK CONVENTION  ON CLIMATE CHANGE

COP-7 is scheduled to take place from 29  October - 9 November 2001, in Marrakech, Morocco. For more  information, contact: the UNFCCC Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815- 1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.int;  Internet: http://www.unfccc.int/