---
title: "HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE FCCC AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE 31 JULY 1997"
id: enb1249e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1249e
date: 1997-07-31
abstract: "The Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technical Advice  (SBSTA) heard reports from the contact group chairs and  discussed cooperation with intergovernmental organizations  and the development and transfer of technologies. The Ad  Hoc Group on Article 13 (AG13) discussed the draft report  on the session in a morning meeting. The Subsidiary Body  for Implementation (SBI) met in the afternoon to discuss  matters arising from the UN General Assembly Special  Session (UNGASS), mechanisms for consultations with NGOs  and national communications. Contact groups met throughout  the day on the financial mechanism, communications from  non-Annex I Parties, division of labor between SBSTA and  SBI and arrangements for COP-3 and COP-4. Informal  consultations on the budget were held in the evening."
---

# SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR THE SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE

SBSTA Chair Tibor Faragó (Hungary) called on the contact  group co-chairs to summarize their work. Division of Labor  Group Co-Chair Mark Hambley (US) noted the progress that  had been made and anticipated a completion of a draft  decision later in the day. Methodological Group Co-Chair  Harald Dovland (Norway) noted that the group had found  little overlap between the work of the Secretariat and  other international organizations. He stated that the  budget group has been informed of the need for additional  resources. SAUDI ARABIA objected to the paper to be  presented by the methodological group and stated that the  Secretariat should not be given additional responsibility.  He called for a new working group to discuss  Intergovernmental Technical Advisory Panels (ITAPs) and  reminded the Chair of the G77/CHINA's proposal on ITAPs.  KUWAIT and MALAYSIA stated that they were unable to attend  all of the contact groups because of the limited size of  their delegations. The Chair stated that he would await the  outcome of the contact groups, and encouraged all delegates  to express concerns at the contact group meetings.

Cooperation with International Organizations: The Chair  noted that there was little documentation and encouraged  intergovernmental and international organizations to brief  the delegates on their activities. The International  Oceanographic Commission (IOC) cited the need for  modernizing global sea level observations and called for  assistance from international bodies. The Scientific and  Technical Advisory Panel (STAP) to the Global Environment  Facility (GEF) summarized its activities and workshops on  climate change and noted its cooperation with other  international organizations. The World Meteorological  Organization (WMO) reported on the development of the  Climate Agenda and noted that a report will be submitted to  COP-3. The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)  stated the importance of equity in methodological issues  and called for a resolution. He noted the advantages gained  by sharing of information between groups interested in  activities implemented jointly (AIJ), but cautioned that  AIJ could weaken the development of local technologies.

The IPCC stated that the Third Assessment Report (TAR) is  scheduled for completion by the end of the year 2000. In  addition to physical, chemical and ecological processes,  the TAR will integrate natural and social sciences and  address sectoral issues and regional perspectives. The IPCC  will also produce a 'policy relevant' synthesis report.

LUXEMBOURG, on behalf of the EU, highlighted its submission  containing questions from policy makers, which focuses,  inter alia, on progress in detecting change, non- intervention scenarios and possible policy combinations.  SWITZERLAND noted the importance of disseminating the TAR  results in all UN languages and ensuring adequate resources  for the IPCC secretariat.

CHINA said the TAR should reflect the implementation of  Articles 4.2(a) and (b), and with the US, called for  briefings on the consultations of the Joint Working Group  of the FCCC and IPCC officers. ZIMBABWE, on behalf of the  African Group, as well as CUBA and ZAMBIA, sought stronger  national observation and research systems. She also urged  the IPCC to produce simplified summaries of regional impact  studies and regretted that the GEF did not support UNEP's  proposed climate awareness programme.

The MARSHALL ISLANDS stated that IPCC should strive for  better information on possible scenarios, such as sea-level  rise, and socio-economic impacts resulting from inaction.  Any steps towards a 'user friendly' synthesis report would  assist political leaders. SAMOA cited the fact that some  regions do not have experts in this field as proof of the  need to build capacity. PERU called for work on tropical  forest methodology and the ocean carbon cycle according to  region.

Technology Transfer: The Chair invited comment on a  progress report (FCCC/SB/1997/3), an update on the report  (FCCC/SB/1997/4) and a technical paper on trends and  conditions employed by multilateral lending institutions  (FCCC/TP/1997/1). TANZANIA, for the G-77/CHINA, said  technology transfer remains an essential component and  priority element of FCCC implementation. SBSTA should  continue to establish expert groups on specific issues  using the roster of experts. ZIMBABWE, for the African  group, demanded a reopening of the question of ITAPs, which  could be a first step toward a clearinghouse mechanism.  CHINA said SBSTA should set up ITAPs to facilitate  technology transfer.

The US and the EU suggested that action on ITAPs await a  planned review of the roster at the next SBSTA. JAPAN said  SBSTA should concentrate on updating the roster and should  carefully consider qualifications for ITAPs. MALAYSIA said  ITAPs and the roster should be enhanced to draw expertise  from within governments.

The US said governments' role in technology transfer is to  encourage technology diffusion and remove market barriers.  The focus should be on informing developing country Parties  of channels and conditions for financing. CANADA said the  private sector is the preferred vehicle for technology  transfer; and that government should play a facilitating  role. The EU noted the increasing significance of private  sector financial flows and said work related to public  sector financial flows should focus on energy and  transport. UZBEKISTAN suggested an international technology  exchange advisory group.

Report of the session: Rapporteur Alvaro J. Rodriguez  (Colombia) introduced the draft report of SBSTA  (FCCC/SBSTA/1997/CRP.2). On international organizations,  the US proposed a new paragraph calling upon Parties to  work through other organizations such as IMO and ICAO to  address climate change issues and requested these  organizations to provide a report to SBSTA. On AIJ, the US  reported that the small informal group (CHINA, the US,  NORWAY and CANADA) had not produced agreed text and will  continue consultation until the final SBSTA meeting next  Tuesday.

The Chair of the contact group on methodologies presented  its conclusions. The G-77/CHINA requested more time to  consider this paper before approval. ZIMBABWE noted that  there was limited participation from non-Annex I countries.  The methodologies contact group will reconvene. The  division of labor group reached consensus on a general  approach for national communications, AIJ and NGO  consultations, but other issues remain unresolved and the  group will hold further consultations.

# AD HOC GROUP ON ARTICLE 13

Chair Patrick Szell (UK) convened the final meeting of the  fifth session of AG13 to consider the Group's draft report  to COP-3 (FCCC/AG13/1997/CRP.2). FCCC Executive Secretary  Michael Zammit-Cutajar indicated support for the completion  of AG13 proceedings by COP-4. The Chair informed SAUDI  ARABIA that the FCCC Bureau or the COP would decide what  happens if AG13 does not meet this target date. The EU,  supported by CHILE, SAUDI ARABIA, and SWITZERLAND called  for at least two more AG13 sessions, each lasting 8 half- days and, with KUWAIT and FRANCE, called for a stronger  commitment to completion of work by COP-4. The US and CHINA  did not agree. Chair Szell modified the draft decision for  COP-3 (FCCC/AG13/1997/CRP.2 Annex III) to indicate that  AG13 should continue beyond the COP, to invite AG13 to  complete its work by COP-4, and request it to report to  COP-4 on progress if it fails to meet the target date. He  also amended the draft report (Organizational Matters) to  indicate that AG13 will require two further sessions each  consisting of about six to eight meetings.

Reviewing paragraphs 1-5 of the draft compilation for a  Multilateral Consultative Process (MCP) (Annex II), the  Chair announced a number of editorial changes. On a  paragraph describing how issues are to be taken up, CHINA  asked for the re-insertion of a reference, in brackets, to  consideration of any submission made by 'a Party on its own  request.' KUWAIT, CHINA and SAUDI ARABIA questioned the  adequacy of a decision to cross-reference this procedural  paragraph in an earlier paragraph on the Mandate of the  Committee in order to deal with concerns about consultation  with the Party or Parties concerned.

In the paragraph on the MCP Committee Mandate, SAUDI ARABIA  asked for the re-insertion of a bracketed reference  indicating that questions considered shall be 'upon the  Parties request and in consultation with them.' He also  asked that a subparagraph on tasks entrusted to the MCP  Committee by the COP be placed in its own set of brackets.  The US, supported by CANADA, noted that its bracketed  proposal on the need to maintain the independence of the  MCP under the financial mechanism should form a separate  element in a subparagraph.

Rapporteur Andrej Kranjc (Slovenia) presented the draft  report of AG13-5 (FCCC/AG13/1997/CRP.2) for adoption. Chair  Szell commended the group and indicated that progress had  been made on the draft MCP. He noted that detailed  discussions would be needed at AG13-6 on: assistance to  Parties; the question of who can trigger proceedings; and  the implications of COP-3.

# SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION

Chair Mohammed Ould El Ghaouth reconvened SBI-6, which took  note of an informal paper containing extracts of UNGASS  results on climate and atmosphere. On mechanisms for  consultation with NGOs, the Secretariat introduced two  documents (FCCC/SBI/1997/14 and Add.1). Regarding access by  NGOs, one document contains proposals on the improvement of  existing mechanisms and the establishment of new ones,  including a 'Business Consultative Mechanism' (BCM). The  other document (Add.1), contains additional reflections by  the Secretariat. A public utilities representative and the  Climate Action Network agreed with increased transparency  in the accreditation and registration process. A speaker  representing business and industry NGOs supported the  concept of a BCM, and stressed the need to improve current  communications mechanisms. The International Council for  Local Environmental Initiatives (ICLEI) noted that a report  will be submitted to the COP and its subsidiary bodies  providing data on local government initiatives to reduce  GHGs. The US, MALAYSIA, EGYPT, SENEGAL, the EU, CANADA,  INDONESIA, AUSTRALIA, BENIN and VENEZUELA welcomed  participation of the NGOs in the Convention. MALAYSIA and  BENIN stated that NGOs who are not supportive of the  Convention process should not be allowed to attend.  INDONESIA called for the mechanism for consultation to be  broadened to include local government and business NGOs.  CANADA, AUSTRALIA and VENEZUELA noted the financial  constraints of the Secretariat. CANADA suggested improving  existing bodies and mechanisms. The Chair called on Parties  to submit comments and noted that the issue will be taken  up again at SBI-7.

National Communications from Annex I Parties: The  Secretariat introduced documents including a tentative  schedule of the in-depth review of the second national  communications of Annex I Parties (FCCC/SB/1997/5) in  advance of preparations of a final schedule at SBI-7, an  update on trends in past GHG emissions and future  projections (FCCC/SB/1997/6), and a status report on a  review of the first national communications  (FCCC/SB/1997/INF.3) due for completion by SBI-7. The  Secretariat noted the slow pace of submission of second  national communications due in April this year. The EU  called on Parties to contribute to a successful conclusion  of the communications process. CHINA asked the Secretariat  to include statements on the difficulties Annex I Parties  have experienced in meeting their commitments.

On the development and transfer of technology, the Chair  informed Parties that the item had been thoroughly  discussed by SBSTA.The Chair proceeded to outstanding  issues. Parties adopted draft conclusions ad referendum on:  national communications, reducing the volume of  documentation and mechanisms for consultations with NGOs.  The contact group on the financial mechanism will meet  again. CHINA reported on discussions in the contact group  on national communications from non-Annex I Parties,  highlighting financial and technical difficulties and the  problems posed for consideration of communications given  the staggered submission schedule.

There was no agreement on a draft decision on preparations  prepared by the G-77/CHINA for COP-3 and for COP-4, which  will include the second review of Annex I Party  commitments. The FCCC calls for the second review no later  than 31 December 1998. The Chair appealed for flexibility  from the G-77/CHINA, which had experienced difficulties  with a proposal for a date for COP-4. The Chairs of the G-77/CHINA and the EU agreed to consult with the SBI Chair on  arrangements for COP-3 and COP-4.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

While speakers in SBI were supporting NGO participation in  the FCCC, delegates and observers in the corridors were  considering the prospect of NGO access during AGBM being  limited to participation in Plenary sessions and daily  briefings. Most of the negotiations are planned to take  place in four closed informal groups. Some noted that  exclusion of NGOs is a necessary response to the pressure  on the AGBM to deliver results and that the decision may be  designed to accelerate substantive negotiations. Some NGO  representatives stated that this arrangement hinders the  Convention because, given more access to negotiations, NGOs  are able to apply positive pressure. Other NGO  representatives noted that this is an unwelcome precedent  and now puts the onus on governments to inform NGOs of  their decisions.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### AGBM

The Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate (AGBM) will  open it sixth session today at 10:00 am in the Maritim  Room.