---
title: "REPORT OF THE AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE: 21 - 25 AUGUST 1995"
id: 1222000e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/1222000e
date: 1995-08-25
abstract: "The first Conference of the Parties (COP 1), held in  Berlin from 28 March to 7 April 1995, established an  open-ended 'Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate' (AGBM)  through its decision FCCC/CP/1995/7/Add.1/Decision  1/CP.1, also referred to as the 'Berlin Mandate.' In the  Berlin Mandate (BM), the COP 1 agreed to begin a process  to enable it to take appropriate action for the period  beyond 2000, including the strengthening of commitments  of Annex I Parties in Article 4.2(a) and (b) of the  Convention, through the adoption of a protocol or another  legal instrument. The priority aim of the BM is the  strengthening of commitments in Article 4.2(a) and (b) of  the Convention for Annex I Parties, both to elaborate  policies and measures, and to set quantified limitation  and reduction objectives within specified time frames  such as 2005, 2010 and 2020 for anthropogenic emissions  by sources and removals by sinks of greenhouse gases not  controlled by the Montreal Protocol."
---

The Berlin Mandate process will not introduce any new  commitments for Parties not included in Annex I. The  process provides for both the exchange of experiences on  national activities, particularly those identified in the  review and synthesis of available national  communications, and for a review mechanism. The process  will also consider the protocol proposal submitted by the  Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS), along with other  proposals and pertinent documents. Recognizing that the  process should begin without delay, COP 1 requested that  the status of the AGBM be reported to COP 2 and that the  AGBM complete its work as early as possible in 1997 with  a view to adopting its results at COP 3.

# OPENING PLENARY

In his opening statement, the Chair of the AGBM, Mr. Raul  Estrada-Oyuela (Argentina), noted that this meeting  marked the beginning of a new phase in the life of the  Convention, consolidating all of its past work and  achievements. He said that COP 1 had concluded that  current commitments were inadequate to achieve the  Convention's objectives and had initiated the BM process  for the purpose of taking appropriate action for the  period beyond 2000, particularly with regard to the  strengthening of Annex I Parties' commitments. He added  that the process must include an analysis to identify  policies and measures, but that undertaking these  activities does not preclude work on other topics  pertaining to the BM. He concluded that the task before  this group is complex, but expressed confidence that the  group will help draft a legal instrument to reflect the  wishes of the international community.

The Executive Secretary of the Permanent Secretariat, Mr.  Michael Zammit-Cutajar, said that 16 States had become  Parties since COP 1. Noting the short time available to  accomplish the tasks at hand, he stated that the AGBM  must now discuss the assessment of policies and measures  and the integration of these assessments into the overall  process.  He added that the communications already  submitted have been a 'reality check,' because they  reveal the difficulty in achieving the aim of reducing  emissions to 1990 levels.

# ORGANIZATIONAL MATTERS

The AGBM then considered the provisional agenda and  annotations, including suggestions for the organization  for the first session of the AGBM contained in  FCCC/AGBM/1995/1. This document serves as the main guide  to the organizational issues before this session. The  provisional agenda and the organization of work of the  session including documentation were adopted at the first  meeting of the Plenary. The Chair pointed out that with  regard to documentation, the Executive Secretary, in his  communication of 23 June 1995 to the Permanent Missions,  invited inputs from Parties to be submitted by 8  September 1995, at the latest, for consideration at the  second session of the AGBM (AGBM 2). The following  documents were available for reference at this session:  Review of adequacy of Article 4, paragraph 2(a) and (b),  comments from Parties and other member States, as  contained in document FCCC/CP/1995/Misc.1 and Add.1;  Review of adequacy of Article 4, paragraph 2(a) and (b):  comments from Parties and other member States, as  contained in document A/AC/237/Misc.43 and Add.1.

# ELECTIONS OF OFFICERS OTHER THAN THE CHAIRMAN

COP 1 authorized the Chair of the AGBM to undertake  consultations with the regional groups regarding the  nominations for the Bureau of the AGBM. Discussion on the  election of officers, other than the Chairman was  initiated at the opening Plenary. Saudi Arabia said that  not only was the issue of the bureau of the AGBM not  resolved but that only a temporary bureau for COP 1 had  been selected. The Chair said that this matter was  referred to in paragraph 14 of the Report of COP 1 which  states that the draft rules of procedures were being  applied with the exception of rule 42 (voting) and that  the Bureau should be considered as constituted without  prejudice to the concerns of a number of delegations with  regard to rule 22 (size of the Bureau). Throughout the  week, the Chair conducted consultations with all five  regional groups without resolution of the issue.

On the fourth day of the AGBM, the Chair said that  although regional consultations for the elections of  officers were continuing, it appeared as if no decision  could be made until AGBM 2. He noted that all the  regional coordinators are aware of the various nuances of  the situation and that some positions were strict but he  preferred not to elaborate on this. In the final meeting  of Plenary, the Chair pointed out that this matter  remained unresolved and that he would continue to hold  consultations and report on this during AGBM 2.

# PROGRAMME OF WORK UNTIL COP 3

### STRUCTURE

With regard to the structure of work until COP  3, the Chair said that in the interest of flexibility the  formation of subgroups should be postponed until a Bureau  for the AGBM was established. A number of delegations  supported postponing the formation of subgroups.

 SCHEDULING: The schedule of future sessions of the AGBM  are as follows:second session - 30 October to 3 November 1995 third session - 4 to 8 March 1996 fourth session - 15 to 19 July 1996 fifth session - immediately preceding COP 2,October 1996  (to be decided) sixth session - 10 to 14 March 1997 The meetings will be held in Geneva until the Secretariat  is relocated to Bonn.

The US noted that any expansion of the meeting time of  the AGBM would have to be at the expense of other  subsidiary bodies. The AGBM noted the explanation by the  Secretariat that the amount of meeting time was fixed as  a result of the decisions of COP 1 on the Convention  budget and that any additional meeting time for the AGBM  would have to be at the expense of the other subsidiary  bodies.

### ANALYSIS AND ASSESSMENT

The Chair stated that the BM  provides that the process will include in its early  stages an analysis and assessment, to identify possible  policies and measures for Annex I Parties as contained in  document FCCC/CP/1995/7/Add.1/Decision 1/CP.1, paragraph  4. He said that it will be necessary for the Parties to  define the nature, content and duration of the analysis  and assessment and its relation to other aspects of the  process. With regard to requests for inputs to subsequent  sessions of the AGBM, the Chair stated that the Group had  to consider the matter of inputs from intergovernmental  bodies.

A number of delegations expressed their views on the  nature, scope and duration of analysis and assessment  activities. The PHILIPPINES, on behalf of the G-77 and  China, expressed concern over the lack of funding for  this meeting, which limited the participation of  developing countries and could be detrimental to the  process itself. She affirmed G-77 support for the BM's  balanced text, noting that no new commitments will be  introduced for non-Annex 1 Parties. She added that non- Annex I Party remain committed to 'advance' the  implementation of commitments, which is contingent upon  the fulfillment of Annex I Parties obligations. Over the  course of the week, several delegations highlighted the  significance of the issue. GERMANY stated that it would  make a considerable contribution towards facilitating the  participation of developing countries.

The Chair opened the final day by stating that several  delegations had taken account of the Executive  Secretary's comments on lack of funding for developing  country participation and proposed that the record  include the following: 'The AGBM stresses the importance  of the fullest participation of all Parties in their  implementation of the BM. It expresses regret at the  inadequacy of resources in the special voluntary fund to  support such participation by eligible Parties and the  hope that sufficient resources will be available for the  second session.' The US asked for a listing of those  Parties that were offered funding but chose  not to  attend and asked about the scope of additional  contribution being requested. The Executive Secretary  gave a general summary of the current status of funding  and said he would give specific figures during the  meeting of the SBI. The Chair's proposal to include the  text in the report of the AGBM was accepted.

SPAIN, on behalf of the EU, recalled that according to  the BM, the early stage of the AGBM process includes  analysis and assessment but also includes negotiations in  parallel. He added that the output of the analysis and  assessment has to be taken into account during the  process of the negotiations. He said that environmental,  technological and economic aspects should be considered.  He added that the analysis and assessment process should  identify achievable objectives, successful policies and  appropriate policies and measures. The US stated that  while the Convention itself is an historic achievement,  it was clear from Annex I Parties' national  communications that reaching the Convention's aim remains  elusive. He said that although the US has developed one  of the most comprehensive action plans, preliminary  analysis shows that the US will not return greenhouse gas  emissions to their 1990 levels by 2000. He noted that the  analysis and assessment should suggest ways in which  future approaches can be made more credible and  effective, including analyses on emissions trends,  current proposals, market mechanisms, and the economic  and environmental consequences of actions and inaction,  both global and national, on both Annex I and non-Annex I  Parties. The US also issued a non-paper on the BM  process.

INDIA said that it had been agreed in Berlin that the  existing commitments of Annex I Parties are inadequate  and need to be strengthened. He noted that the crux of  the issue was to set quantified reduction targets within  a specified time frame for Annex I Parties, without  introducing any new commitments for non-Annex I Parties.  He said that the analyses and assessment phase should not  be carried out in a vacuum but should be integrated into  the setting up of quantified targets and time frames. He  pointed out that the BM includes indicative time horizons  and proposed that specific scenarios be considered. He  concluded by stating that the BM should not be  renegotiated. SAMOA, on behalf of the AOSIS, stressed  that the BM was adopted at the highest level. He noted  that the BM does emphasize the need to strengthen Annex I  Parties commitments within specified time frames and  targets and the question was how much and by when. He  welcomed the support for the AOSIS protocol and looked  forward to hearing alternative protocols. He said that  the analyses and assessments would help build the  confidence of all Parties but should be limited to what  is necessary to formulate policies. He concluded by  stating that AOSIS was not interested in 'targets  hurriedly agreed on but never met nor targets endlessly  analyzed and never agreed to.' SWITZERLAND said that the BM clearly states that analysis  and assessments should be conducted in parallel and not   prior to the negotiations. She said that most of the  background work has already been carried by the IPCC,  OECD, IEA and UNEP. She added that the AGBM could request  the SBSTA to compile existing information based on agreed  priorities and prepared by sector-specific expert panels.  She noted that the list of priorities should include:  energy efficiency; economic instruments in energy and  transport, including aviation; renewable energies; and,  CFCs and PFCs. AUSTRALIA stressed the importance of  analyses and assessments for Annex I Parties and said  that it should not be narrowed to particular prescriptive  assumptions. She added that the work associated with such  analyses and assessments should iterative and not limited  to any particular period of the AGBM. She said that the  emphasis of the AGBM in the early stages should be on  providing analytic inputs and this emphasis would shift  to negotiations at a later stage. The Secretariat was  requested to compile information already prepared by the  IPCC, OECD, IEA and the national communications.

CANADA enquired about the exact intent of the aim to  elaborate policies and measures as well as to set  quantified limitation reduction objectives. He said that  the group should leave its options open in terms of  analysis and assessment because many relevant works are  underway in other international fora. He added that no  formal working groups should be established now, and that  the analysis be an iterative process with a continual  flow back and forth between analytical inputs and  negotiations. GERMANY stated its intention to work  towards a negotiating process that leads to an ambitious  protocol or legal instrument on the further reduction of  greenhouse gas emissions for adoption by COP 3. She said  that Germany would make contributions to facilitate  developing country participation. She reaffirmed  Germany's commitment to reducing its carbon dioxide  emissions by 25% by the year 2005 and said that national  reduction targets for the period beyond 2000 were being  developed. She stated that it was 'high time' to start  negotiations on concrete policies as well as quantified  reduction objectives for Annex I Parties and endorsed the  proposal that the Secretariat prepare an annotated  compilation of information for the next AGBM meeting.  ARGENTINA stressed its support for the G-77 and China  statement and said that the analyses and assessments  should proceed 'side-by-side' with negotiations. He  supported the ideas expressed by India and Germany and  added that the second IPCC assessment will provide  valuable scientific insights and that the Secretariat  could facilitate the sharing of relevant information.

CHINA noted that all the Parties must abide by the BM's  provisions or risk distorting the process. Regarding  assessment and analysis, it was essential to devote time  to measures and procedures that have been taken by Annex  1 Parties, and that any attempt to change this would be  unacceptable to developing countries and run counter to  the 'sincere participation' required. Supporting the  assistance  for developing country participation, he  appealed for contributions to the voluntary fund. NORWAY  stated that a thorough analysis was clearly needed, but  sufficient time for the negotiation process must be  ensured. He pointed out that although many assessments  have already been carried out, the key principle of  equitable burden sharing was missing. He noted that  targets alone could never secure emission reductions and  that coordinating policy instruments should be  considered. URUGUAY expressed concern that some  delegations suggested delaying the AGBM process, and  noted that non-Annex I countries are making every effort  to meet existing commitments, despite suggestions to the  contrary. He supported a process that would not call into  question the national development of non-Annex I Parties,  and added that the credibility of the Convention is at  stake with this process.

NEW ZEALAND reiterated the importance of analyses and  assessments and said that analytic work will need to done  throughout the AGBM process but could be emphasized less  at a later stage. He said that sector specific measures  or economy wide instruments could be considered as well  as costs and benefits of measures. He urged the AGBM to  ask SBSTA to review and report on ongoing work done by  IPCC, OECD and IEA. BANGLADESH said that the AGBM should  not renegotiate the BM but negotiate targets and  timetables applicable to Annex I Parties commitments.  Bangladesh's studies on  vulnerability and mitigation  measures were mentioned. The REPUBLIC OF KOREA said that  the AGBM should concentrate on its given mandate and  tasks and that the analyses and assessments of measures  should be confined to the consideration of strengthening  Annex I Parties' commitments. He noted the importance of  developing 'a concrete shopping list' based on existing  information from Annex I Parties' national  communications. JAPAN said that it would consider the  ideas contained in the U.S. non-paper and supported the  timetable for work suggested by Switzerland. He  emphasized the importance of SBSTA and SBI to the process  and stressed the need to coordinate the two bodies  systematically in order to clarify their division of  labor.

The UK said that time must not be wasted renegotiating  the BM. Analysis and assessment must be seen as an aid to  the negotiating process, not a prior phase that could  serve as a delaying tactic. He noted that this phase can  assist by highlighting successful policies and measures,  identifying policies with international application and  assessing new aims. He added that the OECD and the IEA  have already begun work on a possible process, and that  the UK would regard the reduction of 5% to 10% below 1990  levels as an acceptable figure. COLOMBIA indicated that  there should be no new commitments for non-Annex I  Parties. She said that analyses and assessments could be  done to facilitate strengthening the commitments of Annex  I Parties and recommended the stock taking of specific  measures at each stage. COTE D' IVOIRE, on behalf of the  African group, stressed its support for the  G-77 and  China's statements. MALAYSIA noted that the AGBM needed  to set a clear course so as not to divert from the review  of the adequacy of commitments for Annex I Parties. He  asked that the analysis and assessments be conducted in  transparent way with full participation of all Parties.

### REQUESTS FOR INPUTS TO SUBSEQUENT SESSIONS OF THE AGBM

In light of the linkages between inputs and analysis and  assessment, the Chair said that statements on inputs  could include references to relevant issues raised during  discussions on analysis and assessments. He noted that it  was important that the AGBM frame its requests for  information carefully. He reminded delegates to keep in  mind the following: time constraints; provisions of  inputs by the subsidiary bodies; and, the process for  obtaining information from the IPCC, given its own  programme of work. He added that it was important to  differentiate between those inputs required for the  upcoming October session and those required for later  sessions.

The RUSSIAN FEDERATION said although the BM is a complex  and noble undertaking, practical matters needed to be  addressed in the work on a legal instrument, particularly  for countries with economies in transition. Measures to  reduce emissions should be undertaken in the context of  economic development needs. Taking the principle of  'common but differentiated responsibility,' there was a  need for a more flexible approach perhaps through  regional protocols based on either geographical or  economic factors and incorporated through a ratification  process. He supported the Indian proposal of selecting  scenarios as well as the Swiss proposal of selecting  expert panels. CHILE expressed dismay that discussions  appeared to be moving backward rather than forward. He  said that the BM is precise in its mandate and should not  discuss all the issues relevant to the Convention. Under  the BM, the AGBM cannot make those bodies do its work but  should specify the questions to be asked.

SAUDI ARABIA said that analysis and assessment should be  given sufficient time in order to facilitate negotiations  on any future commitments. He added that although some  delegations think this will delay the process, it will  speed future negotiations because any information missing  now will cause hesitation later. He said that the AGBM  needs time to evaluate the existing commitments and  should also consider the economic costs and the  environmental benefits of each proposal beyond the year  2000. He noted that the cost is not limited to Annex I  Parties and rejected the idea that this process was the  'business' of only Annex I Parties. BRAZIL said the major  tasks of this group are to decide collectively on overall  emissions and to apply the concept of common but  differentiated responsibility. He suggested a methodology  for apportioning an appropriate share of contribution for  each country based on environmental impacts. He also  commented that the IPCC has taken its work very seriously  and is devoting energy to international cooperation.

SAMOA, on behalf of AOSIS, stated that requests for  inputs  should not lead to 'an open season' for data  gathering, some of which may be superfluous. He added  that through the IPCC a tradition of information  gathering has been established. He said that inputs and  assessments should not drive this process in an unfocused  manner but the AGBM should instead ask for specific  inputs. KUWAIT disagreed with the EU, noting that this  Convention was more far-reaching that the Montreal  Protocol, and required a more 'open-minded' process. He  cautioned that if this Convention's targets are  exaggerated now, they cannot be relaxed later, nor can  the economic deprivation be erased.  He added that there  may be a wealth of relevant material available, but there  are not many works covering the economic impacts of  reductions on developing countries. The NETHERLANDS  stated that the key issues are clearly spelled out in the  BM, and that assessments and analysis should not be used  to determine whether policies and measures are needed. He  added that the advancement of commitments would greatly  benefit from the transfer of technology. He highlighted  the importance of using international technical bodies,  and supported Brazil's remarks on the possible inputs  from the IPCC and balanced contributions from the  Parties. He said that the AGBM should focus on provisions  that enable the exchange of information on national  communications, not the technical workings of each  policy.

VENEZUELA said that any action undertaken by Annex I  Parties to reduce emissions will affect the economies of  developing countries, and that any assessments should  include these effects. He pointed out that there were few  cross-comparisons of the impacts of the measures of one  set of countries on another and that an integrated  analysis was needed. He believed that inputs should not  be curtailed. JAPAN suggested that work should be carried  out in light of the best available scientific  information, and that the SBSTA and SBI should play  important roles. Each of the Parties should submit a  national communication, which should be reviewed in  depth, and all measures should be compiled and  synthesized both on a sectoral and national level. He  added that there are many sources of information  available, and supported the compilation of an inventory  of all existing information. POLAND supported the  statement made by the Russian Federation, and stated that  the AGBM should ask SBSTA to analyze national policy  actions based on national communications and OECD/IEA  work. He said that the AGBM should work with inputs from  the subsidiary bodies to analyze and recommend particular  scenarios to the COP. CHINA noted that the word 'inputs'  appeared to have many different interpretations. He said  that the 'inputs' submitted by the Parties in the form of  draft protocols and interventions should be the basis of  negotiations on a legal instrument. He emphasized that  only Parties to the Convention can be Parties to the  Protocol. He said that inputs such as the submissions  made by international organizations and the subsidiary  bodies provide information and that all submissions must  conform to the BM. He concluded by stating  that he could  not accept the German elements proposal because it called  for additional commitments from certain large developing  countries and was contrary to the BM.

AUSTRALIA stated that climate change is a global problem  and that the actions taken by Annex I Parties had  implications for developing countries. She said that  inputs to analysis and assessments must encompass the  full range of economic, environmental and social studies  from national and international sources and must consider  all sources and sinks. In addition, studies of activities  implemented jointly were also deemed important to the  AGBM process. She proposed both top-down approaches  including economic modeling used by OECD and IEA and  bottom-up approaches including examinations of sectors  and cost effective technologies. She suggested the early  completion of Annex I Parties' communications. She  supported the consideration of the AOSIS protocol and the  German elements as inputs to analysis and assessment  activities. The CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC highlighted the  lack of funding for developing countries. He supported  the AOSIS statement and the need for strengthening Annex  I Parties commitments. He also commented on the national  micro-project estimating carbon dioxide emissions from  fuel wood use.

The US stated that it was fully aware of the BM's  provisions. He said a comprehensive approach is needed  because actions by Annex I Parties would affect non-Annex  I Parties. He said that although national communications  from non-Annex I Parties were not yet due, many non-Annex  I Parties are taking successful measures and that  information on these would be useful to Annex I Parties.  He provided a partial list of organizations that could  provide inputs on the following: analysis on the AOSIS  protocol and the German and UK proposals; market and  sectoral approaches; fiscal mechanisms and activities  implemented jointly; future forecasts and historic  emission trends, energy, successful technological  options, and methane. The organizations included: the US  EPA, OECD, UNEP, IPCC, World Bank, IMF, FAO, US  Department of Energy, IIASA, Carnegie Mellon, Oxford  Consulting, the Brookings Institute, Alliance to Save  Energy, relevant research institutes at Stanford, Yale,  MIT and Harvard, EDF and the NRDC. He supported the  convening of an expert panel. NIGERIA said that the one  salient point that recurred throughout the discussion was  that analysis and assessment activities were central to  the AGBM process. He suggested a gradient scale approach  with analyses of policies and measures followed by  constructive negotiations. He asked whether speculation  or scientific fact was going to be negotiated. He noted  that the two processes cannot occur simultaneously. He  requested the Secretariat to 'tap' all relevant regional  organizations in the world including OPEC and OLADE and  emphasized the lack of funding for the participation of  developing countries.

PERU felt that the basic aspects being discussed  regarding inputs  are: priority criterion; a 'middle of  the road' stance as to whether analysis and assessments  should occur  simultaneously with negotiations;  information on the economic impacts for developing  countries of Annex I Parties adopting emissions  reductions, and the definition of the Parties' positions  with regard to contributions. NORWAY supported the  Netherlands and commented that the IPCC was the key body  for giving technical and scientific advice. He pointed  out that the BM mentioned the IPCC's role and that the  AGBM should contact IPCC in order to work out practical  solutions. COLOMBIA commented that inputs are a key  element of the BM and that the AGBM must be clear about  time frames. She stated the group should proceed with  negotiations parallel to analysis and assessment  activities. She supported comments made by Peru, and  noted that the only way to achieve the goal of the  Convention was to move forward in all areas. GERMANY  stated that apparently considerable doubt remained on the  German position, in light of comments by China. She said  that with regard to the German elements paper submitted  in September last year, the reference to a certain  category of developing countries was outdated. She added  that other policies, also in the paper, have been seen by  many delegations as a useful input for negotiating new  commitments. FRANCE supported the EU and emphasized the  need not to delay until the end of the process to embark  upon negotiations. He said that without a parallel  process, it would be difficult to agree when the analysis  should stop and negotiations should start. MAURITIUS said  the BM is precise, and contains a clear direction and  mandate. He noted that many delegations said there is  enough material existing, and suggested that this  information be used as inputs in the AGBM process.  Supporting Norway, he said that an active role for IPCC  would prove fruitful.

At the end of the third day, the Chair said that he would  produce a preliminary paper after consulting with  different delegations regarding the distribution of time  between analysis and assessment activities and  negotiations. He said that governments should come up  with lists of possible inputs and added that an objective  synthesis of views would help orient the delegates, as  would an annotated compilation of publications relevant  to analysis and assessment, and a specialized document  based on national communications. The Chair allowed two  more interventions on this topic at the start of the  fourth day. The CLIMATE ACTION NETWORK (CAN) stated that  the success of the BM process will not be judged on the  basis of discussions on analysis and assessment but by  the first emission reduction steps for the Convention. He  noted that while few developed countries are opposed to  the early initiation of negotiations, there was an  evident lack of leadership. CAN proposed a timetable  which would begin negotiations on an emission reduction  protocol in October, and urged delegates not to stop the  BM process before it had started. BANGLADESH, supporting  Germany, stated that the AGBM must start  negotiations on  policies and measures for Annex I parties, and added that  analysis and assessment could be done simultaneously.

The Chair suggested using the substantive ideas of the  BM,  such as analysis and assessment, policies and  measures, quantified limitations, as the basis for agenda  items for the second AGBM session (AGBM 2). SPAIN, on  behalf of the EU, mentioned four necessary elements for  the agenda: structure and possible elements for the  contents of the Protocol; methodology on drafting the  Protocol; consideration of the inputs received; and,  further work for the AGBM, such as setting deadlines for  proposed inputs on objectives and time horizons. SAMOA,  on behalf of the AOSIS, said that the Secretariat should  prepare a document that addresses inputs for analysis and  assessments in accordance with paragraph 5 of the BM  (protocol proposals). He added that Parties should cover  the following topics: quantified limitations and  reduction objectives; coordination mechanisms;  institutional arrangements; and, transfer of technology.

SAUDI ARABIA, supported by KUWAIT, stressed the need to  concentrate on analysis and assessment activities during  AGBM 2, and questioned whether negotiations could proceed  in absence of adequate information. He said that  methodologies should be identified. The PHILIPPINES, on  behalf of the G-77 and CHINA, stated that the G-77 was  still discussing this issue. SWITZERLAND suggested that  their proposals to establish technical advisory panels,  along with prioritized topics for work, could be  addressed in upcoming session. NIGERIA, supporting both  the G-77 and China and Saudi Arabia, said that he would  hold the Chair to his promise of reviewing sources of  information. He said that the AGBM should not be  restricted to the IPCC in carrying out analysis and  assessments. He added that many compromises had been made  in past negotiations and that certain bottom-line needs  could not be compromised in this meeting. US said that it  would be more useful to describe specific analytical  inputs. He requested the Secretariat to circulate its  document prior to AGBM 2 in October, adding that the  results could be used to decide which outside inputs are  required. He stated that the upcoming session should be  used to begin a study of global emissions trends and that  the Secretariat could ask governments to nominate experts  and then select a panel from among these nominations.  AGBM 2 would also be a good time to consider fiscal  mechanisms and activities implemented jointly.

# REPORT OF THE SESSION

A draft of the report of AGBM 1 as contained in document  FCCC/AGBM/1995/L.1 was distributed on Thursday, 24  August. The Chair noted that no one would either totally  displeased or pleased with this draft report. The draft  report, which was accepted by the AGBM, did not include  text on the following agenda items: attendance; election  of officers other than the Chairman; analysis and  assessment; requests for inputs to subsequent sessions of  the AGBM. In the final two days, the AGBM held informal  consultations to produce draft conclusions on the two  agenda items, 3(c) Analysis and assessment, and 3(d)  Requests for inputs to subsequent sessions, for inclusion  in the report on the session. On  Thursday, August 24,  the Chair distributed draft conclusions on these two  remaining agenda items and invited delegates to conduct  informal consultations on the draft conclusions. The  PHILIPPINES, on behalf of the G-77 and China requested  additional time so that the G-77 and China could continue  to work on preparing its own amendments regarding this  matter. On Friday, 25 August, after waiting for the G-77  and China to conclude discussions, the AGBM began  informal consultations on amendments to the Chair's draft  conclusions. The G-77 and China, AOSIS, the Philippines,  the Russian Federation and India distributed separate  amendments. The US distributed amendments and Saudi  Arabia also suggested several minor amendments.

The PHILIPPINES, on behalf of the G-77 and China  submitted a set of amendments to the Chair's draft  conclusions.  The G-77 and China proposals include the  following amendments. The first amendment merges  paragraphs (5) and (6) of the Chair's draft conclusions  regarding inputs, and inserts after the first sentence of  the Chair's paragraph (5): 'Should the AGBM feel it  necessary to obtain specialized inputs, including from  the IPCC acting within its mandate, these should be  obtained through the subsidiary bodies under the FCCC,  such as SBSTA an SBI.' The proposal also inserts  'related' before 'in-depth review reports' in the bullet  item regarding Annex I Parties national communications,  and inserts 'intergovernmental' before 'technical panels'  in the bullet item dealing with the work of the SBSTA.   In addition, the G-77 and China proposed replacing the  reference to Parties and intergovernmental organizations  invited to make information available, in the last  sentence of the Chair's paragraph (6), with 'the entities  responsible for such information.' The G-77 and China amendment included a new paragraph  (6)(bis), which notes that the AGBM, in identifying  policies and measures for Annex I Parties, should ensure  that the measures are: adequate to achieve specified  commitments within the specified time frame; do not have  adverse socio-economic impacts on non-Annex I Parties;  and, assessed for environmental and economic impacts on  developing countries. The G-77 and China also proposed  adding a specific reference to 'Annex I Parties and  related' before 'in-depth review reports' in paragraph  (10) of the Chair's draft regarding national  communications. Finally, with regard to the paragraph  (11) of the Chair's draft which requests SBSTA to prepare  a report of innovative, efficient and state of the art  technologies for consideration at the fifth AGBM session,  the proposal replaces the 'fifth' with 'third'.

The PHILIPPINES submitted a separate amendment consisting  of three new paragraphs, which she said were supported by  most, but not all, of the members of the G-77 and China.  These amendments include references to: the COP as the  supreme body of the Convention and the AGBM being  established by the COP and assigned with a precise and  specific mandate; agreement in Berlin that the existing  commitments of Annex I  Parties are inadequate in meeting  the ultimate objective of the Convention, and need to be  strengthened in the form of a protocol or other legally- binding instrument by COP 3; and, setting of quantified  limitation and reduction targets within a specified time  frame for Annex I Parties without at the same time  introducing new commitments for non-Annex I Parties.

AUSTRALIA supported by the New Zealand, stated that  delegates should restrict themselves to procedural,  rather than substantive matters, and warned against  moving into the work of the October session. The RUSSIAN  FEDERATION, supported by POLAND, stated that the decision  of the BM refers to the principle of 'common but  differentiated responsibility,' and proposed inserting in  paragraph (2), which describes analysis and assessment:  'be based on the principles of the Convention, including  the principle of common but differentiated  responsibilities.' He added that the language of  paragraph (6)(bis), proposed by the G-77 and China,  needed to be reworked. CHILE stated that the order of  paragraphs (2) and (3) should be reversed, to highlight  the purpose of analysis and assessment, and said that the  draft conclusions should accommodate a greater level of  precision. NORWAY urged delegates to restrict their  attempted inputs and added that some of the G-77 proposed  changes are self-evident. The US said that it had decided  not to propose several amendments in light of the  balanced draft conclusions, but was reconsidering the  decision because of the proposals from the G-77 and  AOSIS. He urged delegates to reconsider their position.  CANADA, supporting the Chair's 'balanced' draft  conclusions, said that the proposed amendments would need  be considered in detail and might slow the work of AGBM  1.

TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO, on behalf of AOSIS, stated that the  amendments made by the G-77 and China and the AOSIS would  prove to be time effective for the AGBM process. The  AOSIS amendment proposed replacing paragraph (4) in the  Chair's text with 'While the initial focus will be on  analysis and assessment, it should be carried out in a  manner complementary and integrated with the actual  negotiations, and the relative consideration of the  elements set out in paragraphs (2)(a) to (f) of the  Berlin Mandate, in particular the setting of quantified  limitation and reduction objectives within specified time  frames, will increase as the process advances.' It also  proposed replacing paragraphs (8), (9), (10) and (12),  regarding decisions on the necessary work, inputs of  SBSTA and IPCC, national communications and in-depth  review reports and a SBSTA report on innovative,  efficient and state-of-the-art technologies in upcoming  AGBM sessions, with two new paragraphs. The AOSIS  amendments included a reference that the 'AGBM would as  part of the negotiating process, bearing in mind the need  to adopt a protocol or another legally binding instrument  at COP 3.' The AOSIS amendment concurred with the Chair's  text that the AGBM should decide at its second session  on: the work necessary in support of the  analysis and  assessment; who would undertake it; and, completion  dates. The remaining amendments suggested by the AOSIS,  referring to the work of the AGBM's third and fifth  sessions, categorizes the work done for these sessions  but do not differ in content from paragraphs (8), (9),  (10) and (12) of the Chair's as to what these AGBM  sessions should consider. The AOSIS amendment to  paragraph (11) of the Chair's draft text on the SBSTA  report on technologies adds a reference to the provision  of conclusions and advice in accordance to the mandates  of the subsidiary bodies and in response to the AGBM's  schedule. Finally, the AOSIS added a new paragraph  (6)(tris) referring to the usefulness of working with a  limited number of scenarios.

INDIA, supported by Colombia, acknowledged the Chair's  draft text but added that the draft could be strengthened  with the amendments made by the G-77 and China. He said  that although the amendments might seem voluminous, and  had been characterized as substantive rather than  procedural, they were really non-controversial and quite  reasonable. He noted that India's proposal of working on  the basis of limited number of scenarios was supported by  other delegations. He cautioned against adopting a 'take  it or leave it approach' regarding the various  amendments. He noted that it was not possible begin a  paragraph-by-paragraph negotiation but that it was  possible to have open discussions. JAPAN supporting  Australia, US and Norway, stated that the Chair's draft  conclusions were well balanced and acceptable. He stated  that the new proposals included a lot of controversial  elements and were time consuming and hoped that the  Chair's draft text would be accepted by all.

The US said that he had amendments that he had held in  abeyance, but in view of the amendments made by the G-77  and China and AOSIS, he felt compelled to submit and  distribute these amendments at this stage. He stated that  given the serious time constraint, the AGBM could accept  the Chair's text as a 'common ground.' SAUDI ARABIA said  that the proposal made by G-77 and China should be  included, particularly at this stage of the AGBM process.  He also included some textual amendments including the  addition of 'iterative' before 'analysis and amendment'  in paragraph (3) of the Chair's draft text and adding '  environmentally viable, and economically sound' before  'state of the art technologies' in paragraph (11) of the  Chair's draft text. The EU supported the Chair's draft  text and urged all delegations to do likewise.

The Chair summarized the proposed changes to his first  draft, based on an amalgam of several amendments that had  been proposed. He said that the first paragraph of the  three paragraph amendment submitted by the Philippines  could be included as the new first paragraph. He said  that paragraphs (2) and (3) of his first draft would be  reversed in order. He noted that including the Russian  Federation's amendment referring to the principle of  'common but differentiated responsibility' might create a  domino effect towards the inclusion of other principles  also mentioned in the  Convention. He said that paragraph  (4) of his first draft would be retained as is despite  the AOSIS amendment. He added that paragraph (6)(bis) of  the amendment made by the G-77 and China could not be  included because it described activities for the AGBM  that went beyond the organizational nature of this AGBM  session. In paragraph (7) of the first draft on inputs,  he suggested incorporating the Saudi amendment using  'Lists of issues identified by the Parties...' rather  than 'A list of issues identified during this session and  in the written submissions from Parties.' The other  changes proposed by the Chair included amendments  proposed by the G-77 and China adding 'Annex I Parties  and related' in paragraph (10) of the first draft  regarding Annex I Parties national communications, and  replacing 'fifth' with 'third' in paragraph (11) of the  first draft regarding the SBSTA report on state-of-the- art technologies. The Chair said that the other proposed  amendments will be taken into account while preparing the  document on the lists of inputs from Parties and would be  mentioned in the report of this session.

# FINAL PLENARY

The PHILIPPINES, on behalf of the G-77 and China,  accepted the Chair's draft conclusions as amended, on the  understanding that the paragraph (6)(bis), proposed by  the G-77 and China, and the new paragraphs (2) and (3),  proposed by the Philippines, will be included in a  document available for discussion and consideration at  the second session. She requested that the discussion on  Items 3 (c) and (d) be reflected in the record. The Chair  replied that the proposals would be reflected in the  documents for the second session and would be  substantively considered. SPAIN, on behalf of the EU,  accepted the Chair's draft conclusions. AUSTRALIA  accepted the Chair's draft conclusions, but voiced  concern that paragraph 6, as amended, narrows possible  inputs.

The US accepted the Chair's draft conclusions with the  understanding that the paragraph 7, which invites  entities to make available relevant information, is open  to inputs from NGOs and IGOs as appropriate. He also  requested that paragraph (7)(e) of the US proposal,  requesting the Secretariat to submit a paper describing  historic trends of emissions and changes in sequestration  levels, be included in the final record. The RUSSIAN  FEDERATION accepted the Chair's draft conclusions and  said he will submit a proposal concerning the Russian  Federation amendment, which was not accepted in this  session, in time for consideration at the second session.  SAMOA, on behalf of AOSIS, said that the AOSIS had made  an effort to reflect the BM and its sense of urgency. He  accepted the draft conclusions, but sought to understand  the status of these conclusions. He requested the  Secretariat distinguish between policies, measures and  national communications when compiling Parties'  submissions. BRAZIL commended delegates for putting this  process in a position to start negotiating in its next  session. INDIA welcomed the Chair's revised proposal and  urged all to  extend their unqualified support. He asked  that those ideas that could not be considered at this  session be identified as issues for future consideration.

The Chair said that the ideas and concepts included in  the various amendments would be reflected in the final  report of this session. He said that the decisions to  consider particular matters during specific sessions do  not exclude the AGBM from considering other matters  during those sessions. The US said that it differed on  the interpretation of 'developed country/other Parties'  referred to in subparagraph 2 (a) of the BM and said that  actions taken prior to 2000 are not be simply carried  through beyond 2000. He noted that this was the same  position taken by his delegation at COP 1. The  conclusions were then finally adopted.

# A BRIEF ANALYSIS OF THE MEETING

COP 1 established the AGBM to carry out a process that  would enable it to take appropriate action beyond the  year 2000, including the strengthening of the commitments  of the Annex I Parties through a protocol or other legal  instrument. The BM states that 'the process should begin  without delay and be conducted as a matter of urgency.'  While AGBM 1 did embark on 'the Berlin Mandate process,'  the sense of urgency was not readily apparent. AGBM 1 can  only be characterized as a qualified success since an  agenda for work for the next meeting was adopted. But the  more serious inability to elect a bureau for the AGBM at  this meeting might continue to impede procedural and  substantive progress at the upcoming session.

Over the course of the week, different interpretations  emerged regarding the function and scope of AGBM 1. Some  thought that AGBM 1 was strictly organizational while  others sought to consider more substantive matters, which  were reflected in the BM, including beginning  negotiations on strengthening the commitments of Annex I  Parties. The divergence of opinions regarding what issues  should be considered by AGBM 1 emerged in the discussions  on Agenda items 3(c) Analysis and assessment, and (d)  Requests for inputs to subsequent session of the AGBM.  Discussions on both matters overlapped to a great degree.  In these discussions, the emphasis was on determining the  duration and scope of analysis and assessment activities  and what should be considered as inputs for the AGBM  process.

With regard to analysis and assessments, some developed  countries preferred a lengthier and iterative phase of  analysis and assessment activities with negotiations to  begin at a later stage, arguing against a premature start  of negotiations. The developing countries along with some  developed countries preferred that negotiations not be  delayed, arguing that any further delays in strengthening  Annex I Parties commitments would hamper the progress and  credibility of the Convention. A number of developing and  developed countries agreed that information for analysis  and assessments was both existing and available, while  some developing and developed countries argued that more   information needed to be gathered. In the end, it was  agreed that the Secretariat would prepare an annotated  compilation of information relevant to the BM process for  consideration at AGBM 2.

The AGBM process was neither completely stifled nor  accelerated.  Instead the AGBM took an initial step  towards finding 'common ground' for detailing those  activities related to inputs and analysis in the upcoming  session. What remains to be seen is what AGBM 2 will do  with the various inputs it has requested from the  Secretariat, particularly, the first edition of an  annotated compilation of information, the lists of issues  identified by Parties, and the list of policies and  measures, identified in Annex I Parties' national  communications. The more difficult questions that remain  unanswered are at what stage will the AGBM begin  negotiations on a protocol or other legal instrument on  strengthening the commitments of Annex I Parties and when  will the BM process approach the level of specificity  necessary for achieving the Convention's objectives.

# THING TO LOOK FOR

### AGBM 2

The second session of the AGBM will be held on 30  October to 3 November 1995 in Geneva. The AGBM will  consider the following inputs from the Secretariat: a  compilation of submissions from Parties; the first  edition of an annotated compilation of information  relevant to the BM process; lists of issues identified by  Parties; and a synthesized listing of policies and  measures identified in Annex I Parties' national  communications.