---
title: "HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE SIXTH SESSION OF THE AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE: MONDAY, 3 MARCH 1997"
id: 1241000e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/1241000e
date: 1997-03-03
abstract: "The sixth session of the Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate  (AGBM-6) of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change opened  on Monday, 3 March 1997 in Bonn, Germany. Following opening  statements, delegates adjourned the formal session and convened  an informal round table on new proposals from Parties. Parties  elaborated on their proposals and responded to questions.  Delegates also agreed to convene 'non-groups' to exchange views  and merge different proposals."
---

# OPENING SESSION

AGBM Chair Raúl Estrada-Oyuela (Argentina) noted the considerable  number of new proposals and called for long-term sustained  efforts from industrialized countries. He said changes would be  neither easy nor inexpensive, but added that the costs resulting  from inaction far outweigh the costs of preventative measures. He  welcomed Dan Reifsnyder (US) as rapporteur.

FCCC Executive Secretary Michael Zammit-Cutajar noted that AGBM-6  marks the last session prior to the six-month deadline for  circulating a draft protocol. The negotiating text must 'contain  the seeds' of the final outcome and there should be no surprises  after 1 June 1997.

The WORLD COUNCIL OF CHURCHES appealed to delegates to act now  and noted that delayed action will involve even higher demands.  He said climate change is an issue of global justice and called  on AGBM to promote lifestyle changes in developed countries.

The secretariat introduced the 'Framework Compilation of  Proposals' (FCCC/AGBM/1997/2 and Add. 1); 'Implementation of the  Berlin Mandate: proposal from Parties' (FCCC/AGBM/ 1997/Misc.1)  and 'Comments from Parties' (FCCC/AGBM/ 1997/Misc.2). Regarding  the organization of work, the Chair urged AGBM to produce,  elaborate on and streamline a negotiating text to be ready by 1  June. He proposed establishing two 'non-groups': one non-group to  focus on institutions and processes, final elements, definitions  and the preamble, and one non-group to work on continuing to  advance commitments in Article 4.1. He said the main purpose of  the non-groups is to exchange views, rather than to negotiate,  and to merge different proposals into one text in order to  facilitate adoption of a negotiating text.

CHINA, IRAN and  MOROCCO, on behalf of the African Group,  requested clarification on the division of tasks between non- groups and asked  whether the non-groups would address P&Ms and  QELROs.  The G-77/CHINA, supported by the EU, MALAYSIA and the  AFRICAN GROUP urged for a limited number of additional groups,  given the constraints facing small delegations. CHINA also  cautioned AGBM not to 'waste time' on issues related to  institutions and definitions. The Chair said P&Ms and QELROs  would be addressed in Plenary and noted the value of institutions  and legal systems.

The EU urged countries to provide input in legal language and  streamline the Framework Compilation text by focusing on  achievable options. The EU also suggested that the Chair  develop  a protocol or another legal instrument by 1 June, if AGBM does  not complete this work by the end of the week. IRAN said the EU  proposal was premature and SAUDI ARABIA urged that AGBM complete  a negotiating text and not leave work for the Chair. The Chair  noted that non-groups will be open only to Parties and will not  involve negotiation.

# ROUND TABLE ON NEW PROPOSALS FROM PARTIES

AGBM Vice-Chair Suphavit Piamphongsant (Thailand) opened the  round table and noted that 18 new proposals have been submitted.  The proposal by POLAND, BULGARIA, ESTONIA, LATVIA and SLOVENIA,  stated that QELROs should be legally binding. Proposed criteria  for QELROs include: GDP per capita; each Party's contribution to  global emissions; emissions per capita and/or emissions intensity  of GDP. He also preferred the 'menu approach' for establishing  measures to be adopted by Parties.

The EU proposal includes a general commitment for Parties listed  in 'Annex X,' which would consist of OECD members and countries  with economies in transition. It groups P&Ms into Annex A  (mandatory), Annex B (high priority) and Annex C (priority). The  proposal allows for joint implementation and voluntary  application by non-Annex X Parties.

The G-77/CHINA urged AGBM to adhere to the Convention and the  Berlin Mandate and refrain from developing new commitments for  non-Annex I Parties. The G-77/CHINA proposal calls for: ensuring  that P&Ms have no adverse socio-economic impacts on developing  countries; establishing a concrete compensation mechanism for  damage in developing countries arising from implementation of  response measures; and setting QELROS within specified time  frames, such as 2005, 2010 and 2020.

FRANCE proposed differentiating the commitments of Annex I  Parties according to present emission levels of greenhouse gases  per inhabitant and per GDP. He proposed coordinating P&Ms at an  international level and considering joint measures between Annex  I and non-Annex I Parties.

ICELAND proposed differentiation and the following parameters for  identifying differences in national circumstances: GHG emission  intensity and level, share of renewable energy sources and GDP  per capita. He supported the formula Norway presented at AGBM-5,  amended to account for the share of renewable energy. MALAYSIA  commented that parameters are changing regularly. MAURITIUS  inquired about a supervisory mechanism for this formula.  VENEZUELA, supported by COSTA RICA, suggested 'historical  responsibility' as an additional criterion for differentiation.  SWITZERLAND added 'past efforts' by countries to reduce  greenhouse gas emissions as another criterion.

IRAN's proposal opposes CO2 taxes, energy taxes and new  commitments for non-Annex I countries. His suggestions for  reducing GHG emissions include: a focus on all GHGs, market- determined energy prices, removal of subsidies on coal and  polluting energy sources, development of renewable energy  sources, enhancement of sinks and attention to  production and  consumption sector activities and industrial processes. IRAN also  proposes a compensation mechanism for adverse impacts of response  measures. Responding to ZIMBABWE, IRAN noted that its proposed  compensation mechanism is designed to compensate countries that  incur losses due to polices and measures stipulated by the AGBM  legal instrument and does not provide funds for countries that  incur damages resulting directly from climate change. The US  suggested that the proposal requires AGBM to project the  consequences of non-action and asked what methodology would be  used to make such a projection. IRAN replied that further details  would be supplied at a later date.

AUSTRALIA proposed: a collective reduction objective for 'Annex  A' Parties, which are those listed in Annex I of the FCCC;  mitigation activities that result in equal percentage changes in  per capita economic welfare among 'Annex A' Parties;  differentiated commitments; use of indicators in the negotiation  process; and further consideration of market-based approaches  such as emissions trading and joint implementation. The proposal  also supports a regular review process that Parties may activate  in regard to their own commitments. Responding to MALAYSIA,  AUSTRALIA said formula approaches are too simplistic to account  for wide variations among countries' circumstances and emphasized  that differentiation is not a means to delay action, but to  achieve fairness. AOSIS asked why supporters of differentiation  had not pooled their proposals and requested information on how  differentiation would work in practice. CHINA expressed concern  that emissions trading would replace government commitments with  activities of firms and individuals.

KUWAIT, NIGERIA and SAUDI ARABIA supported the proposal by the G-77/China. They expressed concern about economic and social  consequences of developed country Parties' policies and measures  and requested adequate compensation for developing countries.  They recalled Article 4.8(h), which refers to countries whose  economies are highly dependent on income generated from fossil  fuels, and 4.10, which states that Parties shall take into  consideration the specific needs and concerns of fossil fuel  producing countries and adverse effects resulting from the  implementation of commitments. They noted that developed country  Parties should take the lead in combating climate change.

The US asked: whether developed countries that export fossil fuel  or suffer from increased oil prices are eligible for  compensation; whether developers of solar power are liable for  injury; and whether developed countries that take action to  prevent damage in developing countries are also liable under this  proposal. SAUDI ARABIA reiterated that developed country Parties  should bear more of the burden and accommodate such effects  through measures like differentiation. ITALY pointed out that the  Convention does not include a compensation mechanism. SAUDI  ARABIA, supported by IRAN, noted Article 4.8, stating that  funding action be considered in regard to the specific needs of   developing countries. KUWAIT noted his disappointment that the  developed countries' proposals do not mention any provision for  developing countries' compensation.

CANADA noted that economic change in energy sources has occurred  over the past century and will continue regardless of a protocol.  SAUDI ARABIA emphasized that it is the right of every Party to  try to minimize the adverse impacts of an international binding  agreement according to provisions given in the Convention.

NEW ZEALAND emphasized the importance of flexibility with respect  to time (multi-year average emission limitations); place  (emission trading); and coverage (all GHGs and sinks).

The US proposal contains: emissions budgets (banking and  borrowing emissions); annual reports on measurement, reporting  and compliance by 'Annex A' and 'Annex B' countries. Annex B  would contain countries that have voluntarily entered before  protocol adoption; non-compliance measures (e.g. denial of  opportunity to engage in emission trading or loss of voting  rights); continuing to advance implementation of Article 4.1,  particulary 'no regrets' measures; emission trading between  Parties with budgets, and joint implementation between all  Parties. Several countries noted the complexity of the US  proposal. In response to the EU, the US highlighted the ability  of countries to determine their own budgets and the penalty for  emission borrowing. THAILAND suggested that AGBM not spend time  discussing emissions trading.

UZBEKISTAN proposed differentiation for Annex I Parties,  according to the level of economic development and GDP per  capita. He urged for flexibility regarding obligations of  countries with economies in transition, and developed-country  support for non-Annex I country activities.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

Several AGBM participants commented on developments towards a  common position regarding QELROs within one regional economic  integration organization. Despite its internal debate on burden  sharing, agreement was reached on a common target. Some delegates  suggested that this common position could advance the entire AGBM  process by sparking a transatlantic debate. In contrast, others  characterized the proposed target as 'unrealistic' and doubted it  would be taken seriously. One developing country delegate said  the proposal could sharpen AGBM's focus on strengthening  developed country commitments, while others noted that the  target's timeframe greatly lessens its impact.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### AGBM

Plenary will convene at 10:00 am in the Plenary I Hall and  begin consideration of the preparation of a protocol or another  legal instrument. Following Plenary, AGBM will divide into two  'non-groups.'