---
title: "SUMMARY OF THE TWELFTH SESSIONS OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES OF THE UN FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE: 5-16 JUNE 2000"
id: enb12137e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12137e
date: 2000-06-16
abstract: "The twelfth sessions of the subsidiary bodies (SB-12) of  the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  (FCCC) were held from 12-16 June 2000 in Bonn, Germany,  preceded by one week of informal meetings from 5-10 June.  With almost 1700 participants in attendance representing  145 Parties, three observer States, 148 observer  organizations and the media, delegates to SB-12 and the  informal meetings continued to work toward fulfilling the  Buenos Aires Plan of Action (BAPA) adopted at the Fourth  Conference of the Parties (COP-4) in November 1998. Under  the BAPA, Parties set a two-year deadline to strengthen  FCCC implementation and to prepare for the future entry  into force of the Kyoto Protocol. The Sixth Conference of  the Parties (COP-6), scheduled to take place from 13-24  November 2000, in The Hague, the Netherlands, will mark the  culmination of this two-year process."
---

During the course of the informal meetings and SB-12,  delegates focused on a range of technical and political  issues aimed at laying the foundations for negotiations on  a comprehensive agreement to be completed at COP-6. This  resulted in the adoption of 21 draft conclusions on various  issues, including policies and measures, land use, land-use  change and forestry, guidelines under Articles 5  (methodological issues), 7 (communication of information)  and 8 (review of information) of the Protocol, technology  transfer, and mechanisms. SB-12 also adopted the Report of  the Joint Working Group on Compliance. At the close of SB- 12, delegates expressed a general sense of satisfaction  that they had reached their limited, but essential,  objective. By developing negotiating text on key issues for  consideration at SB-13, the meetings paved the way for the  critical stage of negotiations that is still to come.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FCCC AND THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

The FCCC was adopted on 9 May 1992, and opened for  signature at the UN Conference on Environment and  Development in June 1992. It entered into force on 21 March  1994, 90 days after receipt of the 50th ratification. It  has currently received 184 instruments of ratification,  acceptance, approval or accession.

### COP-1

The first Conference of the Parties to the FCCC  (COP-1) took place in Berlin from 28 March - 7 April 1995.  In addition to addressing a number of important issues  related to the future of the FCCC, delegates reached  agreement on the adequacy of commitments and adopted the  'Berlin Mandate.' Delegates agreed to establish an open- ended Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate (AGBM) to begin a  process toward appropriate action for the period beyond  2000, including the strengthening of Annex I Parties'  commitments through the adoption of a protocol or another  legal instrument. COP-1 also requested the Secretariat to  make arrangements for sessions of the Subsidiary Body for  Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) and the  Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI). SBSTA serves as  the link between the information provided by competent  international bodies, and the policy-oriented needs of the  COP. SBI was created to develop recommendations to assist  the COP in the review and assessment of FCCC implementation  and in the preparation and implementation of its decisions.

### AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE

The AGBM met eight  times between August 1995 and COP-3 in December 1997.  During the first three sessions, delegates focused on  analyzing and assessing what the possible policies and  measures (P&Ms) to strengthen the commitments of Annex I  Parties (developed country Parties and Parties with  economies in transition) could be, how Annex I countries  might distribute or share new commitments and whether  commitments should take the form of an amendment or a  protocol. AGBM-4, which coincided with COP-2 in Geneva in  July 1996, completed its in-depth analysis of the likely  elements of a protocol and States appeared ready to prepare  a negotiating text. At AGBM-5, in December 1996, delegates  recognized the need to decide whether to permit Annex I  Parties to use mechanisms that would give them flexibility  in meeting their quantified emissions limitation and  reduction objectives (QELROs).

As the protocol was drafted during the sixth and seventh  sessions of the AGBM, in March and August 1997,  respectively, delegates streamlined a framework compilation  text by merging or eliminating some overlapping provisions  within the myriad of proposals. Much of the discussion  centered on a proposal from the EU for a 15% cut in a  basket of three greenhouse gases (GHG) by the year 2010  compared to 1990 emissions levels. In October 1997, as  AGBM-8 began, US President Bill Clinton called for  'meaningful participation' by developing countries in the  negotiating position he announced in Washington. In  response, the G-77/China distanced itself from attempts to  draw developing countries into agreeing to new commitments.

### COP-3

The Third Conference of the Parties (COP-3) was held  from 1-11 December 1997, in Kyoto, Japan. Over 10,000  participants, including representatives from governments,  intergovernmental organizations (IGOs), non-governmental  organizations (NGOs) and the media, attended the  Conference, which included a high-level segment featuring  statements from over 125 ministers. Following intense  formal and informal negotiations, Parties to the FCCC  adopted the Kyoto Protocol on 11 December 1997.

In the Protocol, Annex I Parties to the FCCC agreed to  commitments with a view to reducing their overall emissions  of six GHGs by at least 5% below 1990 levels between 2008  and 2012. The Protocol also established emissions trading,  Joint Implementation (JI) between developed countries, and  a Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) to encourage joint  emissions reduction projects between developed and  developing countries. To date, 22 Parties have ratified the  Protocol. The Protocol will enter into force 90 days after  it is ratified by 55 Parties to the FCCC, including Annex I  Parties representing at least 55% of the total carbon  dioxide (CO2) emissions for 1990.

### COP-4

The Fourth Conference of the Parties (COP-4) was  held from 2-13 November 1998, in Buenos Aires, Argentina,  with over 5000 participants in attendance. During the two- week meeting, delegates deliberated decisions for the COP  during SBI-9 and SBSTA-9. A high-level segment, which heard  statements from over 100 ministers and heads of delegation,  was convened on Thursday, 12 November.

Following hours of high-level closed door negotiations and  a final plenary session, delegates adopted the Buenos Aires  Plan of Action (BAPA). Under the BAPA, the Parties declared  their determination to strengthen the implementation of the  FCCC and prepare for the future entry into force of the  Protocol. The BAPA contains the Parties' resolution to  demonstrate substantial progress on: the financial  mechanism; the development and transfer of technology; the  implementation of FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9, as well as  Protocol Articles 2.3 and 3.14 (adverse effects);  activities implemented jointly (AIJ); the mechanisms of the  Protocol; and the preparations for the first Conference of  the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the  Protocol (COP/ MOP-1).

### SBI-10 AND SBSTA-10

The subsidiary bodies to the FCCC held  their tenth sessions in Bonn, Germany, from 31 May - 11  June 1999, and began the process of fulfilling the BAPA.  SBSTA considered topics such as Annex I communications,  methodological issues and the development and transfer of  technology. SBI discussed, inter alia, administrative and  financial matters and non-Annex I communications. SBI and  SBSTA jointly considered the mechanisms of the Protocol,  AIJ and compliance.

### COP-5

The Fifth Conference of the Parties (COP-5) met in  Bonn from 25 October - 5 November 1999. With over 3000  participants in attendance and 165 Parties represented,  delegates continued working toward fulfilling the BAPA.  During the two-week meeting, delegates deliberated  decisions for the COP during SBI-11 and SBSTA-11. Ninety- three ministers and other heads of delegation addressed  COP-5 during a high-level segment held from 2-3 November.  COP-5 adopted 32 draft decisions and conclusions on, inter  alia, the review of the implementation of commitments and  other FCCC provisions, and preparations for COP/MOP-1.

### INTERSESSIONAL MEETINGS

Several FCCC workshops were held  prior to SB-12 to assist the process leading to COP-6  relating to: the development of elements of procedures and  mechanisms relating to a compliance system under the  Protocol; adverse effects of climate change and the impact  of implementation of response measures; guidelines under  Articles 5 (methodological issues), 7 (communication of  information) and 8 (review of information) of the Kyoto  Protocol; best practices in P&Ms; and technology transfer.  Informal consultations were also held on various issues,  including mechanisms.

# REPORT OF SB-12

During SB-12, SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions on  issues such as: 'best practices' in policies and measures  (P&Ms); land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF);  guidelines under Articles 5 (methodological issues), 7  (communication of information) and 8 (review of  information) of the Kyoto Protocol; good practice guidance  and uncertainty management in national greenhouse gas  inventories; and development and transfer of technologies.  SBI considered and adopted conclusions relating on Annex I  communications, non-Annex I communications, the financial  mechanism, arrangements for intergovernmental meetings, and  administrative and financial matters. SBI and SBSTA jointly  addressed and agreed to conclusions on adverse effects,  compliance and the Protocol mechanisms. The subsidiary  bodies were assisted in their work by a pre-sessional week  of informal meetings and workshops, held from 5-10 June,  aimed at making substantial progress and providing textual  proposals for SB-12. In addition, five contact groups, a  joint SBI/SBSTA working group and numerous informal  meetings and consultations were convened during the formal  session, which also helped the subsidiary bodies complete  their work.

# SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE

SBSTA Chair Harald Dovland (Norway) opened the first formal  meeting on Monday, 12 June, and welcomed participants to  the session. He noted that the preceding week of informal  meetings and workshops considered several issues listed  under the SBSTA agenda, and said the meetings and workshops  had made significant progress on these issues. He stated  that the aim of SBSTA-12 was to agree on negotiating texts  in preparation for substantive negotiations at SB-13.

FCCC Executive Secretary Michael Zammit Cutajar expressed  hope that the week of informal meetings and workshops would  facilitate progress during SB-12. He noted that a week of  informal meetings would also precede SB-13. Delegates then  adopted the provisional agenda and organization of work for  the session (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/L.1).

## 'BEST PRACTICES' IN POLICIES AND MEASURES

The issue of 'best practices' in policies and measures  among Annex I Parties was addressed in two informal  meetings during the pre-sessional week, at a SBSTA plenary  meeting on Tuesday, 13 June, and in two subsequent informal  meetings. Conclusions on P&Ms were adopted by SBSTA on  Friday, 16 June.

During the informal meeting on Tuesday, 6 June, Dovland  summarized the outcome of the P&Ms workshop held in April  in Copenhagen, and asked delegates for suggestions on  future work. Most delegates underlined the value of  exchanging information on P&Ms, although many expressed  concern with the heavy workload prior to COP-6. The EU  proposed additional workshops to address the technical  aspects of P&Ms, and, with others, emphasized the need to  improve quantification of assessment of P&Ms at a sectoral  level. Canada, supported by Australia, called for  indicators taking into account specific national  circumstances, and expressed preference for the concept of  'good practices.' With the US, he highlighted the  importance of completing national inventories. The  Netherlands and France said that reliance on inventories  alone was insufficient for evaluating the effectiveness of  P&Ms. Nigeria and others proposed workshops to examine the  effect of P&Ms on developing countries, and suggested that  P&Ms be dealt with as a cross-cutting issue with Articles  4.8 and 4.9 (adverse effects).

Delegates were invited to submit written proposals. These  formed the basis of draft SBSTA-12 conclusions and  preliminary elements of a draft decision by COP-6, which  were considered at an informal meeting on Friday, 9 June.  The draft conclusions included a SBSTA recommendation that  work on sharing information continue, in particular through  a workshop in 2001. The draft decision stated, inter alia,  that this process should lead to a further elaboration of  the guidelines under Article 7.2 (national communications)  and enable demonstration of progress by 2005, as called for  in Article 3.2. The EU supported moving forward by  exchanging views on both texts. Noting the lack of time,  the G-77/China objected to consideration of elements of a  draft decision. Saudi Arabia proposed considering only  those conclusions that expressed appreciation for the  workshop in Copenhagen and called for a workshop in 2001.

At the SBSTA-12 Plenary on Tuesday, 13 June, Chair Dovland  recalled the broad agreement on the usefulness of  exchanging information, and urged delegates to develop the  terms of reference for another workshop. The EU highlighted  the importance of quantifying the effectiveness of Annex I  Parties' domestic actions, and called for workshops to be  held in accordance with terms of reference to be adopted by  SBSTA-13. Switzerland, opposed by the G-77/China, proposed  that a contact group be established using the Chair's  consolidated text as a basis for discussion. Argentina  underlined his international commitment to voluntarily  reduce GHGs once Parties devise a new instrument that  enables non-Annex-I countries to participate in emissions  trading.

In an informal meeting on Wednesday, 14 June, chaired by  José Romero (Switzerland), delegates continued their  consideration of the draft conclusions. Chair Dovland's  preliminary elements of a draft decision were not tabled.  The EU tabled additional paragraphs on conclusions,  including a proposed terms of reference for a possible  workshop on P&Ms. The G-77/China presented alternative text  on the terms of reference. On the draft conclusions,  delegates agreed to replace 'best' with 'good' practices,  and specify reference to Protocol Article 2.1(g). Delegates  failed to agree on whether the terms of reference of a  workshop should be determined before or after COP-6. The  EU, Poland, Switzerland and the G-77/China urged that the  terms of reference be considered at SBSTA-13, while  Australia, Canada, Japan and the US proposed consideration  after COP-6.

Delegates continued deliberations in an informal meeting on  Thursday, 15 June, during which they reiterated their  positions on the timing and nature of further activities on  P&Ms. Following these discussions, text recommending that  the work on P&Ms continue, in particular through a workshop  in 2001, was replaced with text noting the decision to  consider the issue further at SBSTA-13. The text proposed  by the EU and G-77/China on terms of reference for a  workshop on P&Ms was not adopted.

On Friday, 16 June, SBSTA adopted conclusions on P&Ms  (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/CRP.4) that: take note of the Chair's  report of the workshop on 'best practices' in P&Ms held in  Copenhagen in April 2000; conclude that the workshop helped  Parties advance their work on sharing experiences regarding  'good practice' in P&Ms related to Protocol Article 2.1(b);  and note the decision to consider this issue at SBSTA-13.  Venezuela, on behalf of the G-77/China, expressed  disappointment at the lack of substantive progress  regarding preparations for a workshop.

## METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES

### LULUCF

Land use, land-use change and forestry was  considered during informal meetings during the pre- sessional week. The informal meetings, co-chaired by  Halldor Thorgeirsson (Iceland) and Philip Gwage (Uganda),  addressed a number of issues, including: consideration of  the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's (IPCC)  Special Report on LULUCF; and preparation for Parties'  submissions due on 1 August, including criteria and guiding  principles for the identification of additional activities  under Article 3.4 and a data reporting format. An open- ended break-out group chaired by Andreas Fischlin  (Switzerland) worked on the data reporting format based on  proposals by the EU, Australia and the US. Following a  preliminary exchange of ideas on criteria and guiding  principles, the Co-Chairs prepared a draft conclusion that  was discussed during the formal session.

On Wednesday, 7 June, IPCC Chair Robert Watson chaired a  special side event on the IPCC Special Report on LULUCF. He  presented the report's major findings, which were then  elaborated on by some of the lead authors. Areas covered  included: the global carbon cycle; afforestation,  reforestation and deforestation (ARD) definitions and  accounting scenarios; methods for measuring and monitoring  changes in carbon stocks; potential of Article 3.3 (ARD)  and 3.4 activities; project-based activities; reporting  guidelines; and sustainable development implications.

In an informal meeting held on Thursday, 8 June, Co-Chair  Thorgeirsson introduced a paper on possible elements for a  draft decision. The paper contained reference to relevant  parts of the IPCC Special Report's summary and aimed to  help guide discussions, which continued during the next two  days. Focusing on implications for Articles 3.3 and 3.4,  the discussions touched on, inter alia:ARD definitions, accounting scenarios, and how to  combine them; issues related to separating 'human-induced'  activities, 'direct human-induced' activities, and natural  variability; improved management versus land-use change; the basis of and need for a definition of 'forest'; the carbon accounting schemes and their relationship  to atmospheric carbon; implications for the harvest-regeneration cycle; carbon stock changes versus fluxes; baselines and additionality; non-CO2 gases; and incentives for sequestration where no land-use change  occurs, and for the capture of co-benefits.

LULUCF was subsequently addressed during SBSTA-12's opening  session, on Monday, 12 June. Co-Chair Gwage noted the  capacity-building function of the pre-sessional week with  regard to the IPCC Special Report on LULUCF. Several  developing country Parties and the EU called for sufficient  time to consider the report. Burkina Faso, on behalf of the  African Group, suggested holding a workshop for African  Parties on the Special Report and underscored links between  land degradation and sequestration. Brazil, on behalf of  the G-77/China, emphasized that work on LULUCF should be  guided by the ultimate objective of the FCCC and the  principle of common but differentiated responsibilities. He  expressed concern that the growing 'sink' in Annex I  countries would create an entitlement to emit, and called  for appropriate carbon accounting approaches. Colombia,  opposed by Samoa, supported equal treatment of forestry in  the CDM. On Article 3.3 and 3.4, Australia and Canada  suggested addressing both as a package. Switzerland said  Article 3.3 should be given priority. The EU stressed  emissions reductions as the main emphasis when elaborating  Article 3.4.

A contact group on LULUCF met several times between 12-15  June to consider SBSTA-12 draft conclusions. Differing  views were expressed on, inter alia: criteria and guiding  principles for identification and selection of additional  activities under Article 3.4; a synthesis of elements for  textual proposals to be presented in Parties' submissions  due on 1 August; and additional intersessional work. On  criteria and guiding principles, the EU called for  inclusion of further criteria and a guiding principle  emphasizing emissions reduction. Australia opposed this  proposal, stressing the importance of allowing for  consideration of national circumstances. Parties agreed to  request an indication of how the additional activities  proposed by Parties in their 1 August submissions relate to  the objectives and principles of the FCCC and the Kyoto  Protocol. On textual proposals, agreement was reached on  the elements for a synthesis from Parties' 1 August  submissions, to be prepared by the Secretariat to  facilitate work at SBSTA-13. On additional intersessional  work, the G-77/China highlighted the need for non-Annex I  capacity building on LULUCF, and called for regional  workshops. Delegates agreed to invite the SBSTA to  encourage workshops. Co-Chair Thorgeirsson highlighted a  proposal to convene an intersessional consultation between  SB-13 and COP-6 to support the negotiation process, and  urged delegates to focus on what is needed for COP-6.  Tuvalu cautioned against moving forward with draft  decisions during the intersessional consultation.

Following further consultations, draft conclusions were  completed on Thursday, 15 June. Saudi Arabia highlighted  the tight schedule for an intersessional consultation,  while Italy offered to host this intersessional meeting in  Rome. The FCCC Secretariat and Poland provided detail on  the workshop on LULUCF, scheduled to take place in July in  Poznan, Poland. The draft conclusions  (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/CRP.2) adopted by SBSTA on Thursday, 15  June, inter alia:request indication of how the additional activities  proposed by Parties in their 1 August submissions relate to  the objectives and principles of the FCCC and Protocol; agree to a data reporting format for Parties' 1 August  submissions (annexed to the conclusion) and decide to  consider this data at SBSTA-13 in light of document  FCCC/SBSTA/1999/14, sub-paragraphs 46(g),(i) and (k) (a  SBSTA-11 conclusion requesting the preparation of a  consolidated synthesis of the proposals); request Parties to provide textual proposals on, inter  alia, Article 3.3 and 3.4; request the Chair, with the FCCC Secretariat, to  prepare a synthesis of textual proposals from Parties' 1  August submissions; encourage the organization of regional workshops; and invite the Chair to convene an intersessional  consultation between SBSTA-13 and COP-6.

### GUIDELINES UNDER ARTICLES 5, 7 AND 8 OF THE PROTOCOL

On  Monday, 5 June, delegates began their consideration of  guidelines under Articles 5 (methodological issues), 7  (communication of information) and 8 (review of  information) in an informal meeting. Co-Chair Helen Plume  (New Zealand) identified the objectives of the meeting as  finalizing the guidelines under Article 5.1 (national  systems) and making progress on the guidelines under  Article 8 and methodologies under 5.2 (adjustments). She  proposed convening two sub-groups to address these  objectives. In response to a request by the EU, she agreed  to hold a session in one of the sub-groups to exchange  views on Article 7. Taka Hiraishi of the IPCC presented the  Special Report on Good Practice Guidance and Uncertainty  Management in National GHG Inventories. The meeting split  into two subgroups from 5-10 June.

Sub-group on National Systems under Article 5.1: The  subgroup started considering draft guidelines on Monday, 5  June, and agreed on revised draft Guidelines for National  Systems for the Estimation of Anthropogenic Greenhouse Gas  Emissions by Sources and Removals by Sinks under Article  5.1 of the Kyoto Protocol on Saturday, June 10. Over the  course of the week, the sub-group discussed technical  details relating to the guidelines, including links to  other articles. Several delegates expressed their views on  reporting with regard to national systems, and links to  Article 7. The EU said the reporting requirements should be  elaborated within the current guidelines, while the US  supported making reference to such requirements being  defined in the guidelines under Article 7, in accordance  with the relevant decisions of the COP or COP/MOP. Co-Chair  Plume noted that the issue would be carried over to future  discussions on Article 7. The EU suggested a new paragraph  on characteristics of national inventories that makes  reference to monitoring of legal entities and/or projects  under Articles 6 (JI) and 17 (emissions trading). The US  opposed making specific reference to these articles and  noted a paragraph leaving open the option of future linkage  through Article 7 and relevant decisions by the COP or  COP/MOP. The agreed version of the guidelines follows the  US suggestions.

Sub-group on Articles 5.2 and 8: From 5-7 June, delegates  considered the general structure of the proposed draft  guidelines under Article 8. The EU presented a proposal for  a new six-part structure for the guidelines under Article  8: general approach, national inventory submissions,  information on assigned amounts, national systems, national  registries, and national communications and other  commitments. Delegates also exchanged views on Part I of  the guidelines relating to the review of national inventory  submissions, national systems and national registries. On  Classification of Inventory Problems, the EU presented a  non-paper that provides for, inter alia, categories of  problems triggering an expedited procedure.

On Thursday, 8 June, delegates exchanged views on the draft  guidelines under Article 7. On information submitted under  Article 7.2 (national communication), the EU, supported by  Saudi Arabia and opposed by the US, Canada, New Zealand and  Australia, proposed reporting on 'demonstrable progress.'  When considering the Draft Guidance on Methodologies for  Adjustments under Article 5.2, the EU, with Switzerland and  Slovakia, said the trial period on inventory review would  provide the IPCC with the information on problems to be  addressed.

On Thursday and Friday, 8-9 June, the sub-group continued  consideration of the EU proposal on the Classification of  Inventory Problems in the guidelines under Article 8. On  adjustments, Slovakia, the US, New Zealand and Canada said  all inventory problems were adjustable, while the EU said  inventory problems of a specific threshold were not  adjustable. Delegates then invited the Co-Chairs to produce  a revised text of the elements of draft guidelines under  Article 8, based on the EU six-part structure.

### SBSTA

On Monday, 12 June, Co-Chair Newton Paciornik  (Brazil) reported to SBSTA on the pre-sessional informal  meetings and their outcome. The US and Japan recommended  adoption of guidelines for national systems at COP-6.

Contact Group on Articles 5, 7 and 8: A contact group, co- chaired by Plume and Paciornik, met from 12-15 June. On  Monday, 12 June, the contact group reached agreement on the  second draft of the Guidelines for National Systems under  Protocol Article 5.1. The Secretariat introduced SBSTA  Draft Conclusions on Good Practice Guidance and Uncertainty  Management in National GHG Inventories. The contact group  also considered draft conclusions on guidelines under  Articles 5, 7 and 8. By Thursday, 15 June, delegates agreed  on the text of the draft guidelines and considered the  revised Co-Chairs' Elements of Draft Guidelines under  Article 8. Delegates made proposals to guide the FCCC  Secretariat in its elaboration of the text. The EU said the  guidelines should include the elements for review under the  FCCC and the Protocol, but would single out the parts of  the guidelines not applicable to Annex I Parties not  Parties to the Protocol. On review of national inventory  submissions, delegates discussed the categories of first- order problems to be identified during the initial check or  during the individual inventory review stage. On procedures  for adjustments, Japan suggested adding the option whereby  the Party itself could voluntarily apply an adjustment. The  US said the incentive should rather be for Parties to  follow the IPCC methodologies as elaborated by good  practice. Norway said the Expert Review Team (ERT) would  only propose an adjustment, while the compliance body would  adopt it. On the review of information on assigned amounts,  New Zealand sought a reference to Article 4 (joint  fulfillment) to ensure transparency on the distribution of  assigned amounts between members of the agreement.  Australia called for the addition of a new Part VI, 'Review  of Activities under Article 6.' SBSTA Conclusions: On Thursday, 15 June, SBSTA adopted the  draft conclusions on Guidelines under Articles 5, 7 and 8  of the Kyoto Protocol (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/L.2), in which the  SBSTA, inter alia:agrees on guidelines under Article 5.1 and on the  preparation of a draft decision on this issue at SBSTA-13  for adoption at COP-6; advises SBI to encourage Annex I Parties to establish  national systems in accordance with Article 5.1 as soon as  possible in order to gain experience; agrees to consider guidelines under Article 7 at  SBSTA-13 with the aim of recommending their adoption at  COP-6; requests the Secretariat to prepare draft guidelines  under Article 8, for consideration at SBSTA-13, with the  aim of recommending their adoption by COP-6; agrees to consider information related to  methodologies for adjustments at SBSTA-13, with the aim of  recommending a decision on initial guidance at COP-6; and invites Parties to submit, by 1 August 2000, comments  on issues related to Articles 5, 7 and 8.

### GOOD PRACTICE GUIDANCE AND UNCERTAINTY MANAGEMENT IN  NATIONAL GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORIES

SBSTA considered this  sub-item on Monday, 12 June. Taka Hiraishi, Co-Chair of the  IPCC Task Force on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories,  introduced the IPCC report on this issue, saying it was a  significant additional instrument in improving national  inventory estimates. The EU urged adoption at COP-6 of good  practice guidance as part of inventory reporting. Ghana  called for regional workshops to enhance developing country  understanding of the IPCC report. The US called on Parties  with economies in transition (EIT) to take into account the  good practice guidance as soon as possible and said non- Annex I guidelines should also incorporate good practice.

Draft conclusions were considered by SBSTA on Thursday, 15  June. Parties approved the proposed amendment that Annex I  Parties with EIT may phase in good practice guidance 'two  years' rather than one year later than other Annex I  Parties. Saudi Arabia and China, opposed by the US, Canada,  the EU and Slovenia, suggested deleting reference to 'all  Parties' being assisted by good practice guidance in  preparing higher-quality greenhouse gas inventories. After  lengthy discussion, involving consideration of a proposal  by China to include text requiring Annex I Parties to test  the good practice guidance, delegates agreed to remove the  reference to 'all Parties.' SBSTA adopted conclusions on this issue  (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/L.3), on Thursday, 15 June. The  conclusions, inter alia:note that good practice guidance will assist in  preparing higher-quality greenhouse gas inventories that  are transparent, consistent, complete and comparable; endorse the good practice guidance as an elaboration  of the Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines and recommend its use  in national GHG inventories; encourage non-Annex I Parties to apply good practice  guidance, as appropriate, and to the extent possible in the  preparation of their GHG inventories; and note that good practice guidance does not include  specific guidance for the Land-Use-Change and Forestry  sector.

### METHODS AND TOOLS TO EVALUATE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION

SBSTA  considered this sub-item on Tuesday, 13 June. The  Philippines and the Gambia stressed focusing attention on  new and effective adaptation technologies. The EU and  others suggested organizing a workshop proposed by the  Secretariat with the IPCC, preferably after COP-6 and after  the completion of the work of the IPCC Third Assessment  Report. China and the Alliance of Small Island States  (AOSIS) called for COP-6 resolutions supporting capacity  building in developing countries.

In its conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/CRP.3), adopted on  Friday, 16 June, SBSTA, inter alia:notes progress made in collecting and disseminating  information on methods and tools to assess climate change  impacts; requests the Secretariat, in coordination with the  IPCC, to organize a meeting of experts to explore options  to improve the compilation and review of information on  methodologies; requests the Secretariat to prepare a report on  methodological issues on climate change impacts and  adaptation; and underlines the links with capacity building in  vulnerability and adaptation assessment.

### OTHER METHODOLOGICAL MATTERS

On Tuesday, 13 June, SBSTA  heard a presentation by the FCCC Secretariat on recent  meetings with the International Civil Aviation Organization  (ICAO) and the International Maritime Organization (IMO),  relating to GHG emissions resulting from fuel used in  international transportation. ICAO and IMO made written  progress reports available to SBSTA. On Friday, 16 June,  delegates adopted text within the Draft Report of SBSTA-12  (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/L.1), in which SBSTA took note with  appreciation of these progress reports. Saudi Arabia  underlined the heavy agenda leading up to COP-6, and  suggested that issues relating to emissions from  international transportation be postponed until after COP- 6. While sharing the concern with the heavy workload,  Switzerland stated that it was premature to state that any  agenda items be excluded.  The text was adopted without  amendment.

## DEVELOPMENT AND TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGIES

### STATUS OF THE CONSULTATIVE PROCESS

An informal meeting on  development and transfer of technology was held of  Wednesday, 7 June. During this meeting, participants heard  reports from three regional workshops organized as part of  the consultative process aimed at advancing the  understanding of technology needs, generating ideas on  enhancing technology transfer, and considering elements of  a framework for technology development and transfer.

Reporting on the African workshop, Peter Zhou (Botswana)  outlined technology transfer barriers including the lack of  climate change policies, weak legal and regulatory  frameworks, inadequate finance, and problems with  structural adjustment programmes. He noted the need to,  inter alia: create strategic partnerships between  governments, the private sector, and donors; provide easier  access to financing environmentally-sound technologies  (ESTs) and local technologies; and enhance skills to  support decision making.

Mahendra Kumar (Samoa), reporting on the Asia-Pacific  workshop, said technology needs assessments should be  country-driven and transparent, involving multi-stakeholder  participation. He noted the limited attention paid to  adaptation technologies. Sheik Mohamed Khan (Guyana) said  the Latin America and Caribbean workshop stressed the need  to, inter alia: build indigenous capacities to assimilate  and absorb climate-friendly technologies; improve access to  technology information; involve smaller countries in  capacity-building initiatives; and overcome political  barriers that result in low prioritization of technology  issues.

In the ensuing discussion, issues raised included the need  for a focus on technology transfer for adaptation and a  global advisory institution to assist countries handling  unsuitable technology. Participants also heard a report on  the IPCC Special Report on Methodological and Technological  Issues in Technology Transfer. Ogunlade Davidson, IPCC,  stressed that technology transfer for climate change should  always be viewed in the FCCC's context, and underscored the  need for rapid technology innovation and broad transfer of  EST for mitigation and adaptation.

The FCCC Secretariat introduced the climate technology  website, <http://www.icfconsulting.com/unfccc/climate.nsf>,  aimed at organizing and making accessible technology  information, the project inventory database pilot  initiative that creates a database of technologies in  climate cooperation projects and the technology project  inventory database.

On 13 June, SBSTA considered the status of the consultative  process. Delegates heard a report by the IPCC on the key  conclusions of the IPCC Special Report on Technology  Transfer. SBSTA Chair Dovland reported that the Friends of  the Chair group, formed at COP-5, had begun to identify  priority areas for a COP-6 decision.

Several delegates underscored the importance of capacity  building for technology transfer. The EU and Japan stressed  coordination of existing sources of funding. The EU, Japan,  Australia and Canada underlined the CDM's role in advancing  technology transfer to developing countries. China,  supported by several delegates, opposed any suggestion that  the CDM could replace technology transfer under the FCCC.  Mauritius suggested using specialized and professional  bodies to monitor technology transfer projects.

Several developing countries supported the G-77/China's  call for the formation of a contact group at this session,  while the US, Australia, Switzerland and Canada preferred  forming it at SB-13. The US, Malaysia and Switzerland said  the IPCC special report could provide guidance in  continuing the work on implementing FCCC Article 4.5  (technology transfer).

Consideration of this issue was continued in the Friends of  the Chair group. This group discussed the possible elements  for a framework for meaningful and effective actions to  enhance the implementation of Article 4.5. The group met  four times during SB-12. The group identified themes  emerging from the consultative process as technology needs  and needs assessment, technology information, enabling  environments, capacity building, and mechanisms for  technology transfer. They also began identifying actions  under each theme. The informal consultations in the Friends  of the Chair will resume from 2-4 August 2000, in Colorado.

On Thursday, 15 June, delegates adopted draft conclusions  on Development and Transfer of Technology, Status of the  Consultative Process (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/CRP.1). In these  conclusions, SBSTA, inter alia:notes the completion of the three regional workshops  and the large and diverse number of ideas generated; takes note of the IPCC Special Report on  Methodological and Technological Issues in Technology  Transfer; invites Parties to submit their views by 30 June on a  framework for implementation of meaningful and effective  actions to enhance the implementation of FCCC Article 4.5; recalls its request to the Chair to avail at SB-13, a  report of the outcome of the consultative process; and notes the progress made in the development of the  Secretariat's technology web page and in developing a pilot  project on technology cooperation project inventory.

### OTHER MATTERS RELATING TO DEVELOPMENT AND TRANSFER OF  TECHNOLOGIES

Delegates considered this agenda item on  Tuesday, 13 June, and heard a presentation by John  Houghton, IPCC, on the applicability of regional climate  models at the scale of small island States. He highlighted  that, despite progress in regional modeling, much  uncertainty remains.  SBSTA adopted the Chair's draft  conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/L.4) on Thursday, 15 June. In  the draft conclusions, SBSTA:notes the IPCC report on the applicability of regional  climate models on the scale of small island States; notes that regional models are being developed and  applied for use on the scale of small island States and  that state-of-the-art regional climate models are critical  tools for planning for adaptation to climate change and its  effects; and invites the Co-Chairs of IPCC Working Group I to make  more information available at SB-14 on the status of  regional climate modeling for different regions.

## COOPERATION WITH RELEVANT INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

Delegates considered cooperation with relevant scientific  organizations, UN Bodies and international conventions on  Tuesday, 13 June. Reports were presented by the IPCC, the  Global Climate Observing System (GCOS), the FCCC  Secretariat, the World Health Organization (WHO), the  Ramsar Convention on Wetlands, and the United Nations  Development Programme (UNDP).

IPCC Chair Robert Watson noted that the IPPC had completed  work on three special reports: Methodological and  Technological Issues in Technology Transfer; Emissions  Scenarios; and Land-Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry, as  well as a report on Good Practice and Uncertainty  Management in National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. He said  that the preparation and peer-review of the Third  Assessment Report (TAR) is well advanced, with the three  Working Group reports of the TAR expected to be approved in  January 2001. He urged governments to: support expert  participation in the IPCC process; continue to financially  support the IPCC trust fund; and avoid using the IPCC  process as a pre-negotiating forum for the FCCC and the  Kyoto Protocol. On the Special Report on Emissions  Scenarios, he highlighted that model calculations indicate  that the emission scenarios would result in projected  increases in global mean surface temperature of about 1-5  degrees Centigrade by 2001, in contrast to those reported  in the IPCC Second Assessment Report of 1-3.5 degrees  Centigrade.

GCOS Director Alan Thomas outlined developments regarding  the facilitation of an intergovernmental process for  systematic climate observations; reported on GCOS plans for  regional workshops on capacity building; and highlighted  developments in the global observing systems for climate,  including recent activities of the Integrated Observing  System Strategy partnership.

Nick Davidson, Deputy Secretary-General of the Ramsar  Convention on Wetlands, identified themes of common  interest with the FCCC and noted that the Scientific and  Technical Review Panel of the Ramsar Convention is  preparing a review of these themes. Carlos Corvalan (WHO)  and Thomas Johannson (UNDP) identified recent relevant  climate change initiatives being undertaken by their  respective organizations.

In discussions on the presentations: Nigeria highlighted  the need for open, thorough and transparent scientific  processes; Switzerland invited governments to contribute to  funding the IPCC; Australia, Canada and others underlined  the capacity-building implications of the GCOS regional  workshops; and several delegations underlined the  importance of maintaining the political independence of the  IPCC.

On Friday, 16 June, SBSTA adopted conclusions on  cooperation with relevant international organizations  (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/CRP.5). In its conclusions, SBSTA, inter  alia:notes the progress made in the preparation of the TAR; urges Parties to continue their financial support of  the IPCC and ensure the scientific integrity of the IPCC  process; notes the efforts being taken by the GCOS Secretariat  to organize regional workshops to identify priority  capacity-building needs; invites the CGOS Secretariat to report periodically on  its activities; and requests the FCCC Secretariat to continue to explore  areas of cooperation on substantive matters with UN  agencies and other conventions.

## OTHER MATTERS

On Tuesday, 13 June, delegates heard a report from the  Secretariat on proposals to advance the implementation of  FCCC Article 6 (education, training and public awareness).  The Central African Republic, with others, advocated that  Article 6 be a separate SBSTA agenda item. The G-77/China  undertook to provide SBSTA with consolidated text on this  issue on 14 June.

SBSTA adopted conclusions on this issue  (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/CRP.6) on Friday, 16 June, in which it:notes with appreciation that the issue of education,  training and public awareness had been taken up at the  current session; notes that the issue has so far received little  attention from SBSTA, and that any lessons learned by  Parties, intergovernmental organizations and NGOs should be  compiled and shared; and requests the Secretariat to place Article 6 on the  agenda of SBSTA-14 and, where appropriate, subsequent  sessions.

## CLOSING SBSTA PLENARY

In the closing SBSTA Plenary held on the afternoon of  Friday, 16 June, delegates adopted draft conclusions on:  P&Ms; methods and tools to evaluate impacts and adaptation;  cooperation with international organizations; and  education, training and public awareness. Chair Dovland  presented, and delegates adopted, the draft report of  SBSTA-12 (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/L.1).

Colombia emphasized its support for a document that Costa  Rica had presented earlier in the day, outlining the views  of 14 Latin American countries regarding implementation of  the CDM.

In his closing remarks, Chair Dovland thanked delegates for  their cooperation, emphasized that much hard work remains  before COP-6, and closed the meeting at 3:35pm.

# SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION

SBI Chair John Ashe (Antigua & Barbuda) opened SBI-12 on  Monday, 12 June. He noted important progress at the  informal meetings the previous week. Delegates adopted the  agenda and the organization of work for the session  (FCCC/SBI/2000/L.1).

## ANNEX I COMMUNICATIONS

### SECOND REVIEW OF NATIONAL  COMMUNICATIONS

On Monday, 12 June, the SBI considered the experience with  the review of second national communications from Parties  included in FCCC Annex I. Switzerland, supported by the  Russian Federation, underlined the importance of training  review experts and supported holding of a workshop to  exchange information about the preparation of third  national communications.  The EU said it expected a  decision on Protocol Article 7.2 (national communications)  at COP-6 and a decision on Protocol Article 8 (review of  information) at COP-7. The US and Canada suggested  postponing consideration of the review of guidelines on  national communications until SB-14. With Australia, they  stressed the issue was not a priority for COP-6.

On Wednesday, 14 June, the SBI adopted the draft  conclusions on national communications of Annex I Parties  (FCCC/SBI/2000/CRP.5), whereby the SBI, inter alia,  welcomes the majority of the reviews that have been done,  and requests the Secretariat to organize a workshop in 2001  to exchange information among Annex I Parties on  preparations for the third national communications.

## NON-ANNEX I COMMUNICATIONS

On Monday, 12 June, SBI heard the first report of the  Consultative Group of Experts (CGE) that was established to  assist non-Annex I Parties improve their national  communications. The Chair of the CGE, Dr. José Gonzalez  Miguez (Brazil), said that the CGE had at its first meeting  elected its officers, agreed on a schedule of meeting and  activities, and prepared an indicative budget. The EU  suggested that the findings of the CGE be presented by June  2001, to contribute to the review of guidelines so as to  adopt improved guidelines for the second national  communications at COP-7. The US urged the CGE to provide  specific advice on the guidelines and report on it at SB- 14. Brazil, with the Central African Republic and Kenya,  said that it was premature to consider a review.

On Wednesday, 14 June, SBI adopted draft conclusions on the  report of the first meeting of the Consultative Group on  Experts (FCCC/SBI/2000/CRP.1), which, inter alia, urges the  CGE to provide specific recommendations for the improvement  of non-Annex I communications, for consideration by SB-14,  so that a decision can be taken at COP-7. The SBI also  adopted conclusions on the provision of financial and  technical support (FCCC/SBI/2000/CRP.2), taking note of the  activities undertaken by the Secretariat to facilitate the  provision of financial and technical support and the  activities of the GEF in providing financial and technical  assistance for the preparation of initial national  communications.

## FINANCIAL MECHANISM

### PROGRESS REPORT OF GEF ENABLING AND CAPACITY-BUILDING  ACTIVITIES

On Tuesday, 12 June, the SBI heard the GEF  report on its enabling and capacity-building activities.  Several Parties highlighted the importance of GEF support  for the preparation of national communication from non- Annex I Parties and expressed appreciation for the GEF  Capacity Development Initiative (CDI). Canada supported the  comprehensive approach in assessing capacity development  needs. The EU said it should, together with the national  communications, provide the basis for a framework on  capacity building. The G-77/China stressed the need to link  this initiative with the process under decision 10/CP.5.  The SBI then heard a report from the IPCC on the GEF  proposal entitled, 'Assessment of Impacts of, and  Adaptation to, Climate Change in Multiple Regions and  Sectors in Coordination with the IPCC,' where the  outstanding cooperation with UNEP and the GEF was stressed.

On Wednesday, 14 June, the SBI adopted draft conclusions,  with minor amendments, on the progress report on the review  by the GEF of its enabling and capacity-building activities  (FCCC/SBI/2000/CRP.3). In these conclusions, SBI:notes with satisfaction the work done by GEF; recognizes that the findings on enabling activities  may provide input to the negotiations on capacity building; invites the GEF Council to forward a report on the  review of enabling activities at COP-6; and stresses that the capacity development initiative  (CDI) process should be country-driven, take long-term  perspectives on capacity-building needs and priorities and  take into consideration the progress made in capacity- building negotiations under the FCCC.

### ADDITIONAL GUIDANCE TO THE GEF ON SUPPORT TO THE IPCC

On  additional guidance to the GEF on support to the IPCC, the  EU said that whereas the Parties should send signals to the  GEF that the IPCC project could benefit the process, it was  not appropriate for the FCCC to prejudge the decision- making of the GEF Council. He proposed that the FCCC  request the GEF Council to consider rather than approve the  IPCC project. SBI adopted the amended draft conclusions  (FCCC/SBI/2000/CRP.4), which note the importance to the IPCC project on 'Assessment  of Impacts of, and Adaptation to, Climate Change in  Multiple Regions and Sectors in Co-ordination with the  IPCC'; look forward to the consideration of the project by  the GEF Council; and request the IPCC in consultation with the GEF  Secretariat to report on the further development of the  project at SB-13 and 14.

## ARRANGEMENTS FOR INTERGOVERNMENTAL MEETINGS

On Tuesday, 13 June, SBI considered arrangements for  intergovernmental meetings. France expressed its hope that  SB-13 in Lyon will provide the necessary momentum for  success at COP-6. The Netherlands said progress must be  made on all aspects of the BAPA at COP-6. Relaying a  message from the incoming COP-6 President, he said the  outcome of COP-6 must be environmentally credible and based  on common but differentiated responsibilities. On the  provisional agenda for COP-6, the US, the Russian  Federation and Saudi Arabia said the proposed new sub-item  on policies and measures should await SBSTA's  consideration. Saudi Arabia urged full transparency and  participation at COP-6, and Indonesia called for full  participation of developing countries before and at COP-6.  Morocco offered to host COP-7 in Marrakesh, and the SBI  endorsed this proposal. On Friday, 16 June, SBI adopted its  Report of the Session (FCCC/SBI/2000/L.1), containing  conclusions that, inter alia: welcome the offers of France  to host SB-13 and Morocco to host COP-7.

## ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL MATTERS

### LATE PAYMENT ON CONTRIBUTIONS

On Monday, 12 June, the FCCC  Executive Secretary presented a document on late payment of  contributions (FCCC/SBI/2000/2). He outlined the  initiatives taken by FCCC Secretariat to collect  contributions and suggested that Parties consider the  response options presented in his report. An informal  consultation, chaired by Mohamed Mahmoud Ould El Ghaouth  (Mauritania), was convened on the topic. On Tuesday, 13  June, the informal group met to consider a draft decision  on late payment of contributions to be transmitted to SB- 13. Iran, with Germany, Belgium and Australia, highlighted  the need for in-depth consideration of this issue. Iran  opposed transmitting the text to SB-13. He said the  cornerstone of the approach to late payment should be  persuasion not punishment, and the matter should be  addressed in the spirit of common but differentiated  responsibilities. The Netherlands, with Canada, favored  applying the same approach to all Parties, including an  incentive scheme. He said the principle of common but  differentiated responsibilities applied only in assessing  the level of contribution. Chair El Ghaouth said he would  consult with Iran to find language on a text to be  forwarded to SB-13. On Friday, June 16, the SBI adopted  draft conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2000/CRP.6), which, inter alia,  transmit an initial draft decision for consideration at SB- 13 with a view to recommending a draft decision for  adoption at COP-6. The text of the initial draft decision  states, inter alia, that from 1 January 2001, Parties with  arrears of one year or more would be ineligible: for  membership of the Bureau of the COP and its subsidiary  bodies; to participate in the debates at sessions of the  COP and its subsidiary bodies; and for invitation to  intersessional workshops and other meetings.

### IMPLEMENTATION OF THE HEADQUARTERS AGREEMENT

The SBI  considered the Implementation of the Headquarters Agreement  on Tuesday, 13 June. FCCC Executive Secretary Cutajar  raised several issues with regard to the integration with  the host country, namely entry visas, residence status and  work permits for family members, and lack of office space.  He called on Parties to engage actively in this discussion  and promote a satisfactory outcome. Germany said time was  needed for ideal solutions and it would do its utmost to  improve the situation. The G-77/China and others expressed  concern over this situation. Several delegations raised  their difficulties in obtaining visas to attend meetings.  Mexico, with Costa Rica, suggested a draft decision urging  Germany to strengthen cooperation with the Secretariat, for  consideration at COP-6.

On Friday, 16 June, the SBI adopted the draft report on  this agenda itemm as well as draft conclusions  (FCCC/SBI/2000/CRP.7) that, inter alia, invite the host  government to renew its efforts to provide the Secretariat  with sufficient and suitable interim accommodation at one  site, and welcome the assurance of the host government that  it would strengthen its efforts to develop better practices  to address difficulties experienced by some delegates in  obtaining visas and by the FCCC Secretariat with regard to  visas, residence status and work permits for family  members. Cutajar thanked the host government for its  constructive response.

## CLOSING SBI PLENARY

In its final session on Friday, 16 June, the SBI adopted  its draft report of the session (FCCC/SBI/2000/L.1). Chair  Ashe thanked participants and closed the meeting at 12:30  pm.

# JOINT SBI/SBSTA SESSIONS

SBSTA Chair Dovland opened the joint SBI/SBSTA meeting on  Monday, 12 June, and called on delegates to develop text on  as many issues as possible in accordance with the BAPA.  Nigeria, on behalf of the G-77/ China, stressed the need to  negotiate the issues as a package and said the outcome  should be a balanced set of decisions. He called on Annex  II Parties to commit specific financial resources for  technology transfer and capacity building by COP-6.

## IMPLEMENTATION OF FCCC ARTICLE 4.8 AND 4.9 AND MATTERS  RELATING TO PROTOCOL ARTICLE 3.14 (ADVERSE EFFECTS)

Delegates considered FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9 and Protocol  Article 3.14 (adverse effects) in four informal meetings  during the pre-sessional week, at a joint SBI/SBSTA meeting  on Monday, 12 June, and in three subsequent sessions of  SBSTA/SBI contact groups. The informal meetings and contact  groups were co-chaired by Bo Kjellén (Sweden) and Mohamad  Reza Salamat (Iran). Conclusions on adverse effects were  approved at a joint SBI/SBSTA meeting on Friday, 16 June.

In the first informal meeting on Monday, 5 June, Co-Chair  Salamat urged delegates to build on the conclusions of the  technical workshops on adverse effects that were held in  Bonn in March. The EU, with Switzerland, suggested that all  three articles be discussed together, so as to reach a  single decision. Saudi Arabia and the G-77/China  highlighted the fact that FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9 and  Protocol Article 3.14 were addressed separately under the  BAPA, and called for two draft decisions. Co-Chair Salamat  emphasized that the current draft decision will have three  distinct parts without prejudice to SBSTA-12 discussions,  and urged consideration of this procedural issue later in  the negotiation process.

On initial actions, participants suggested, inter alia:  building capacities to cope with climate-related disasters;  integrating climate change issues into national and donor  assistance strategies; developing a vulnerability index;  and including a recommendation on insurance. On the  assessment of the impacts of response measures, Saudi  Arabia highlighted the need to, inter alia: ensure a  comprehensive approach to policies and measures; remove  market distortions in the energy sector; encourage the  diversification of energy sources; and explicitly refer to  compensation. Australia and the US said discussions should  focus on minimizing adverse impacts rather than on  compensation.

On Wednesday, 7 June, delegates discussed Protocol Article  3.14. On actions to minimize the impacts of response  measures, Saudi Arabia said Annex I Parties should:  eliminate tax distortions and remove subsidies; discourage  nuclear energy; support wider use of CO2 sequestration  technologies; help with economic diversification; and  provide compensation where adverse effects are  demonstrated. The US recalled a recent OPEC study  indicating that joint action by OPEC members alone could be  sufficient to counteract any possible impact of response  measures on revenue flows. Venezuela cautioned against  attempts to shift commitments under Article 3.14 away from  Annex I Parties. On actions to minimize the impacts of  climate change, Australia supported a Protocol with a full,  competitive and transparent emissions trading regime and a  CDM regime that includes sinks. Nigeria and Venezuela said  the mechanisms would be insufficient to ameliorate the  impacts of climate change. Various developing countries  highlighted the special needs of least developed countries.

On Thursday, 8 June, delegates considered a compilation of  countries' preliminary written submissions on adverse  effects, and delegates raised additional issues relating to  the adverse effects of climate change and the impacts of  response measures.

On Saturday, 10 June, Co-Chair Salamat summarized issues  raised in submissions and called on delegates to identify  additional issues and comment on the need for and nature of  future meetings. Parties highlighted, inter alia:  institutional and managerial capacity building; training  for vulnerability assessments and response measures;  providing for adaptation within national and sectoral  strategies; and the identification and evaluation of  adaptation options. Co-Chair Salamat indicated that a  consolidated text based on the compilation of Parties'  submissions and discussions would be prepared.

At a joint SBSTA/SBI meeting on Monday, 12 June, Chair  Dovland reported on the recent workshops and informal  meetings on adverse effects. The G-77/China reiterated  their preference for two draft decisions, with the EU,  Australia, Japan, the US and Switzerland expressing  preference for a single decision. Australia, with Japan and  others, said the consolidated text was not an appropriate  basis for contact group discussion, and proposed revisiting  the compilation of Parties' views.

In a contact group on Tuesday, 13 June, Co-Chair Salamat  sought substantive comments on the consolidated text.  Additional issues raised included: enhancing data and  information gathering; improving systematic observation and  monitoring; establishing regional disaster-response  centers; and the role of compensation, funding and  insurance schemes.

In a contact group on Wednesday, 14 June, Co-Chair Kjellén  outlined a cluster of issues to be addressed in drafting  text for negotiation at SBSTA-13. Saudi Arabia, opposed by  the EU, urged that the consolidated text form the basis for  negotiations. Additional issues raised included: the need  for action-oriented workshops; investigating connections  between climate change and extreme weather events; and  improving preparedness to cope with such events. The EU  said scientific uncertainty should not be a reason for  inaction.

In a contact group on Thursday, 15 June, Co-Chair Salamat  asked delegates to consider the process leading to COP-6,  and noted that an informal consultation may be held prior  to the informal meetings preceding SB-13. The G-77/China  supported the development of text for discussion at the  informal meetings prior to SB-13 and noted that, under  BAPA, COP-6 needs to develop initial actions rather than  simply a process. Saudi Arabia supported the need for  further workshops focusing on concrete actions. The US said  progress was needed at SB-13 on negotiating draft  decisions. Co-Chair Salamat said discussions during the  past two weeks had been very productive, and distributed  text for relevant SB-12 draft conclusions.

At the Joint SBI/SBSTA session on Friday, 16 June,  delegates adopted draft conclusion on adverse effects  (FCCC/SB/2000/CRP.2). SBI Chair Ashe noted that these  matters were being considered together. The conclusions:recognize the value of the workshops held in Bonn in  March; note progress made on addressing the implementation of  FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9; note that discussion had commenced on Protocol Article  3.14; and invite the SB Chairs to develop a new text on the  basis of the consolidated text and other inputs from  Parties, as well as comments made during the discussions,  to serve as the basis for negotiation at SBSTA-13.

## COMPLIANCE

Delegates considered procedures and mechanisms relating to  a compliance system under the Protocol in informal meetings  during the pre-sessional week, in joint SBI/SBSTA meetings  on Monday and Friday, 12 and 16 June, and in the Joint  Working Group on Compliance (JWG) from 13-15 June.

On Wednesday, 7 June, delegates to the informal meetings on  compliance heard a brief report by Harald Dovland (Norway),  Co-Chair of the JWG, on the compliance workshop held in  Bonn from 1-3 March. Co-Chair Tuiloma Neroni Slade (Samoa)  introduced the Co-Chairs' Elements of a Compliance System  for the Kyoto Protocol, which was based on Parties'  submissions and discussions during the workshop and  informal consultations held in Montreux in February. He  noted that this would serve as a basis for the week's  discussions. Delegates discussed the Co-Chairs' Elements in  informal meetings held on 7-9 June.

On Monday, 12 June, Co-Chair Slade reported to the Joint  SBI/SBSTA on the workshop held from 1-3 March and the  informal meetings preceding SB-12. He said that these,  together with further submissions from Parties, had formed  the basis for the elaboration of a Co-Chairs' Text to be  considered by the JWG.

The JWG met on Tuesday and Wednesday, 13-14 June, to  consider the Co-Chairs' text composed of a main section and  three annexes containing procedural arrangements. A number  of delegates supported the text as a basis for their work.  The EU, US, Switzerland and Samoa said some elements in the  annexes may need to be included in the main part of the  text. The G-77/China said binding consequences would only  apply to Annex I Parties. On the title of the text, the US  favored a reference to 'procedures and mechanisms related  to compliance under the Kyoto Protocol,' since there are  other provisions in the Protocol dealing with compliance.  The EU preferred 'a compliance system for the Kyoto  Protocol' in order to reflect a comprehensive approach to  dealing with compliance.

On Objective, a number of delegates supported the inclusion  of 'enforcing' compliance. Saudi Arabia sought a reference  to compliance with obligations contained in Protocol  Articles 2 (P&Ms) and 3 (targets). Australia suggested the  compliance system focus on both Articles 3.1 and 4.1 (joint  fulfillment). The EU favored a general reference to the  Party's 'obligations under the Kyoto Protocol.' On Nature, Australia, the EU, the Russian Federation and  the US preferred no express provision. On Principles,  Australia, the Russian Federation, the US, Japan and New  Zealand preferred not expressly providing for these in the  text.

On Scope of Application, Canada, supported by the US,  suggested specifying that the system would apply to all  Protocol commitments/obligations 'as provided in this  decision,' since the accompanying decision would specify  variations in the treatment of Protocol provisions. China,  supported by Saudi Arabia, sought listing the Annex I  Parties' commitments to which the compliance system would  apply, and said compliance with other commitments would be  dealt with under the Multilateral Consultative Process.  Argentina said the compliance system should cover both  Annex I and non-Annex I obligations. Chile added that the  special nature of non-Annex I obligations required that  issues of compliance be dealt with through facilitation.

On the Establishment, Structure and Functions of the  compliance system, the US and Australia, opposed by New  Zealand and the EU, said the text should emphasize the two- branch structure of the compliance body. On Establishment,  Canada, with the Russian Federation and Chile, said the  facilitative branch would not adopt 'decisions.' China  suggested specifying that compulsory measures would not  apply to non-Annex I Parties. Delegates also made several  specific suggestions on the mandate of the enforcement  branch. The EU said any reference to Article 4 (joint  fulfillment) should be bracketed.

On the Structure of the compliance body, the Russian  Federation expressed doubts about having an elective  compliance body, as this would not guarantee that his  country would have a place on it, although it represented a  high share of the current level of emissions. Saudi Arabia,  with Samoa, suggested that the election of members be based  on 'equal representation of the five UN regional groups.'  New Zealand sought greater representation of Annex I  Parties given their more significant obligations.

On the Functions of the compliance body, the G-77/China,  with Saudi Arabia and Samoa, opposed a screening function.  The US stressed that mandatory outcomes would apply  automatically.

On the Submission of Questions to the compliance body,  Brazil suggested that 'a body of representatives  established by the COP/MOP' also be able to submit  questions. China, Japan and Chile stressed the importance  of Article 8 ERT reports, while Australia said these should  be the only way for the process to be triggered. Saudi  Arabia, opposed by New Zealand, supported a role for the  COP/MOP. The US proposed that Parties be able to raise  questions regarding another Party's implementation only  with respect to the facilitative branch. The EU proposed  that the Secretariat also be able to refer questions of  compliance. On the Preliminary Examination of Questions,  Saudi Arabia suggested that if multiple cases arise on the  same type of issues the matter should be referred to the  Subsidiary Bodies.

On Proceedings, several delegates stressed the importance  of integrating elements of the annexes in the main text. On  Decision-Making, Saudi Arabia said decisions would be  adopted by consensus, and in case of failure, by a three- fourths majority vote. On Participation of Parties, the G-77/China said the Party concerned could comment on any  information used by the compliance body as a basis for its  deliberation. On Avoidance of Conflict of Interest, China  proposed that the member of the compliance body who is a  national of a Party involved in a matter should not take  part in 'the consideration of the matter.' Canada added  that this includes members having a direct or indirect  interest in the matter. On Sources of Information, the G-77/China, with the Russian Federation, opposed by New  Zealand, suggested distinguishing between mandatory and  non-mandatory sources. The US, with New Zealand, suggested  the possibility for NGOs to submit information. The Russian  Federation, the US and AOSIS said the issue of  confidentiality of information might conflict with the  principle of transparency and needed further thought.

On the COP/MOP, Switzerland, with New Zealand, said it  would only 'take note' of the reports of the compliance  body. On Outcomes and Consequences, Saudi Arabia, with  China, said that every reference to 'Party,' with respect  to eligibility requirements, should be prefaced by 'Annex  I.' He added that any reference to Article 12 (CDM) should  be bracketed since this mechanism does not fall under the  scope of application of the compliance system. Brazil,  Samoa and the EU suggested framing 'financial penalty' as a  separate option. New Zealand introduced an option  permitting purchase at a penalty rate, inter alia, from  future commitment periods. Australia suggested adding that  if an Article 4 (joint fulfillment) Party becomes  ineligible to use the mechanisms, all other members of the  agreement would lose access to the mechanisms. On Other  Provisions, the G-77/China suggested requesting the  Secretariat to prepare possible options for the adoption of  procedures and mechanisms related to compliance.

On Thursday, 15 June, the JWG considered and adopted with  minor amendments the Report of the JWG on its work during  SB-12. The report (FCCC/SB/2000/CRP.3/Rev.1) was considered  and adopted by the joint SBI/SBSTA on Friday, 16 June. In  its report, the JWG, inter alia, requests the Co-Chairs to  further develop the text on compliance contained in the  annex to serve as the basis for negotiation, along with  inputs from Parties, at SB-13.

## MECHANISMS

Delegates discussed issues related to the Protocol  mechanisms in workshops during the pre-sessional week, a  Joint SBI/SBSTA session and in a contact group during SB-12  chaired by Kok Kee Chow (Malaysia). During the informal  week delegates met in three workshops to discuss the  Chair's Text for Further Negotiations on Mechanisms. A  Draft Consolidated Text On Mechanisms was drafted based on  Parties' inputs, and distributed on Friday, 10 June. During  SB-12, delegates met three times to discuss the draft,  indicate areas where their submissions had not been  reflected, and add text where necessary.  As a result of  the deliberations, a consolidated text on principles,  modalities, rules and guidelines was drafted and  distributed on Friday, June 16 (Future FCCC/SB/2000/4).

###     Clean Development Mechanism:

On Monday, 5 June, Chair Chow  outlined the key features of the CDM, based on the Chair's  Text for Further Negotiations on Mechanisms. He highlighted  the: project cycle; institutions and their functions;  accreditation of operational entities; and the CDM  Reference Manual. Delegates discussed these key features on  Monday, 5 June, and Thursday, 8 June. Samoa said the  Reference Manual would ensure consistency in setting  baselines. The EU asked who would develop the reference  manual. Tanzania asked how the reference manual would  consider the differing sustainable development priorities  of different countries and ensure equitable distribution of  projects. Canada and Norway emphasized that the  verification and certification guidelines should provide  for individual project circumstances. India underlined the  role of the host country in determining project  eligibility. China stressed the need for both host and  investor-Party responsibilities to be clearly expressed.

Bolivia, Colombia, the US, Iran, Honduras, Chile and Norway  supported the inclusion of sinks projects in the CDM. IRAN  said that in light of the FCCC's comprehensive approach,  the CDM should cover all six gases, and all sources and  sinks. The EU and Switzerland opposed sinks projects in the  CDM, as it raised questions of methodological uncertainty,  non-permanence and leakage. The Sudan and Senegal said it  was premature to decide on the inclusion of sinks, as the  IPCC Special Report on LULUCF had just been released.

AOSIS, with Colombia, said Protocol Article 6 (Joint  Implementation) and 12 (CDM) should be given equal  treatment in the context of share of proceeds for  adaptation, as this would ensure real additional funds for  adaptation, sufficient funds for administrative costs, and  no additional transaction costs for the CDM. Norway and the  EU opposed a provision on share of proceeds in Articles 6  and 17 (Emissions Trading). Bolivia called for an analysis  to determine if project-by-project or regional/sectoral  baselines would be appropriate. India supported project-by- project baselines. Switzerland, the US and Norway  underscored the need for stakeholder participation and  transparency in the CDM. Saudi Arabia and AOSIS opposed  nuclear projects under CDM.

On Monday, 12 June, in a Joint SBI/SBSTA session, Colombia  said the CDM should ensure sufficient additionality,  provide for equal treatment between the three mechanisms,  and recognize the unilateral model for the formulation of  projects.

On Thursday, 15 June, in discussing the Draft Consolidated  Text On Mechanisms, delegates differed on the need for,  inter alia: all three mechanisms to contribute to the  adaptation fund; investment and technology additionality;  monitoring of economic, social and cultural impacts of  projects; and an option that reflects the various proposed  CDMs, including unilateral, bilateral and multilateral.  They discussed: the role of the COP/MOP and the Executive  Board; the content and extensiveness of the CDM Reference  Manual; common baselines for the CDM; equitable  distribution of CDM projects; and requirements and costs of  the CDM.

### EMISSIONS TRADING

On Tuesday, 6 June, Chair Chow outlined  the key features of emissions trading, based on the Chair's  Text for Further Negotiations on Mechanisms. On  participation, one option listed was to require the Party's  prior compliance with its obligations, such as compliance  with Articles 5 (national systems) and 7 (communication of  information) and maintenance of national registries, while  another option was to suspend participation if the Party  was not complying with these obligations. On liability,  options presented included seller liability, shared  liability, buyer liability, trigger, compliance reserve and  post-verification proposals. Switzerland, opposed by  Canada, proposed an annual post-verification trading  system, wherein emissions trading would be limited to  Assigned Amount Units (AAUs) surplus to the Party's  allocation plan. With New Zealand and the US, Canada  supported a seller regime complemented by an effective  compliance system. The US highlighted the need to maintain  similar approaches on Articles 4 (joint fulfillment of  commitments) and 17 (emissions trading), since both permit  Parties to fulfill obligations collectively, and pointed  out that Article 4 refers to transferor liability. AOSIS  highlighted the need for environmental integrity of  emissions trading systems, and sought elaboration on the  idea of a compliance reserve. Colombia stressed the need  for a suitable system for the measurement of emissions from  point and mobile sources. India stressed the need to first  determine the character, nature and volume of the  transferable. He said the CDM could be marginalized by  emissions trading because of its sustainable development  requirements.

On Thursday, 15 June, in discussions on the Draft  Consolidated Text On Mechanisms, delegates differed on the  need for, inter alia: the usage of the Protocol-consistent  term 'Part of an Assigned Amount' instead of 'AAUs'; legal  entities to participate in the CDM; a share of proceeds  from emissions trading to fund adaptation; and limits on  transfers.

### JOINT IMPLEMENTATION

On Tuesday, 6 June, Chair Chow  outlined the key features of JI, based on the Chair's Text  for Further Negotiations on Mechanisms. Options for  regulatory intensity of Article 6 (JI) include: extending  to JI projects CDM rules for project  validation/registration, monitoring/issuance, certification  of emissions reduction units (ERUs); and imposing minimal  reporting requirements and optional verification by the  host Party. He sought delegates' views on subjecting JI  projects to CDM-type requirements. Delegates discussed the  issue on Tuesday and Thursday, 6 and 8 June. Noting the  different objectives of CDM and JI, Japan and Poland argued  against additional requirements on JI. New Zealand, with  the US, argued that a JI project should be subject to CDM- type scrutiny only where a Party does not comply with  Articles 5 and 7, and where non-compliance with both  articles impacts the project. The EU supported a CDM-type  project cycle to ensure environmental credibility at the  project level. Nigeria expressed concern that different  transaction costs would reduce CDM take-up and, with India,  China, Bolivia and South Africa, proposed similar  requirements for JI. South Africa argued that JI's  limitation to Annex I Parties does not justify less onerous  requirements. The EU and Switzerland said their submissions  on baselines for CDM applied to JI. South Africa said its  submission on monitoring, reporting and verification for  CDM also applied to JI.

On Monday, 12 June, in a Joint SBI/SBTSA session, Romania,  speaking on behalf of the Group of Eastern European  Countries, and supported by the US, said JI and the CDM  have distinct roles and should not be treated in the same  way. AUSTRALIA cautioned against loading JI and CDM with  transactions costs.

On Wednesday, 14 June, in discussing the Draft Consolidated  Text on Mechanisms, participants differed on the need for,  inter alia, the Executive Board, sinks in JI, share of  proceeds and the Appendix on supplementarity.

### NGO AND BUSINESS PERSPECTIVES

On Tuesday, 6 June, in an  informal session on business and NGO perspectives on the  mechanisms, representatives from the business community,  including the International Chamber of Commerce and the  International Climate Change Partnership, recommended COP- 6, inter alia: agree to clear definitions on fungibility  and tradeability; eschew quantitative restrictions in the  mechanisms; provide clarity on the proposed institutional  controls for CDM; create a strong and fair compliance  system; and approve mechanisms for fast-track CDM  crediting. The Climate Action Network (CAN), representing  the NGOs, said Annex I Parties' participation in the  mechanisms should hinge on their ability to monitor and  report emissions to a given standard and track changes to  AAUs. On the CDM, CAN said it must: encourage the  development of markets for clean energy technologies in the  South; support local, regional and national development  priorities; have minimum overall environmental impacts; and  not undermine Annex I domestic action.

### CONCLUSIONS ON MECHANISMS

On Friday, 16 June, the  SBI/SBSTA adopted draft conclusions by the Chair  (FCCC/SB/2000/CRP.4) forwarding the 'consolidated text on  principles, modalities, rules and guidelines,' to SB-13 as  a basis for further negotiations on the Protocol  mechanisms, with a view to a decision at COP-6.

## CAPACITY BUILDING

### ECONOMIES IN TRANSITION (EIT)

Three informal consultations  on capacity building in countries with economies in  transition were conducted between Thursday, 8 June, and  Thursday, 15 June, to elaborate the elements of a draft  framework for capacity building. A number of issues were  raised, including the need to: integrate capacity building  into national planning processes; develop institutional  capacity on inventories and on Protocol Articles 5 and 7;  expand capacity building to other stakeholders; maximize  the use of regional institutions; and mobilize political  support. The US underlined the fact that EITs have  commitments to reduce emissions, and suggested using the  Protocol mechanisms to support capacity building.

Based on Parties' inputs, SBI Chair Ashe prepared a text  summarizing the possible elements for a draft framework on  capacity building in EITs.

On Tuesday, 13 June, the EITs submitted amendments to the  section on principles. Discussions highlighted, inter alia,  the principle that all needs are addressed in a coordinated  manner, and the EITs' immediate needs.

On Thursday, 15 June, delegates considered amendments to  the Chair's text submitted by Poland and the Russian  Federation. A common EIT position paper was not possible  due to limited time. The Polish submission on  implementation of capacity building includes calls to,  inter alia: develop action plans to reflect national needs  and priorities; invite the GEF, through a COP decision, to  consider the needs of EITs in the capacity development  initiative (CDI); and organize a workshop for the purpose  of identifying and coordinating regional and subregional  programmes. The Russian Federation submission covered the  principles, objectives, strategy and implementation  elements for a draft framework.

Chair Ashe invited delegates to submit views by 30 June, to  allow the Secretariat to compile elements for a draft  framework on capacity building in EITs by SB-13.

### NON-ANNEX I COUNTRIES

On Friday, 9 June, delegates  considered capacity building in non-Annex I countries and  heard presentations by the GEF on the CDI.

Avani Vaish, GEF, said the CDI is an 18-month effort by GEF  and UNDP in three phases: an assessment of country-level  capacity needs; preparation of a comprehensive study to  meet those needs; and development of an action plan. John  Hoff, UNDP, defined capacity development as the ability of  individuals and institutions to set and realize goals, and  said it is influenced by the broader context of the  institutions, and policy and regulatory frameworks.  Delegates heard brief reports by regional experts on the  CDI regional needs assessments. Issues raised included:  lack of financial resources; inefficient management of  human resources and information; inability to retain human  capacity; and a low level of economic, managerial and  communication skills.

On possible elements for a draft framework for capacity  building, several delegates reiterated the need for  capacity building to be country-driven. The G-77/China  stressed that capacity building be a continuous,  integrative and comprehensive process implemented within a  specific time-frame and based on country priorities. The US  stressed the need to work on in-country capacities, build  strong partnerships with local stakeholders and incorporate  capacity building into national strategies. On the role of  institutions, several delegates called for clear guidance  to the GEF to ensure adequate funding for capacity building  initiatives. The G-77/China said national communications  should be the main source of information to monitor the  effectiveness of capacity building.

On Wednesday, 14 June, delegates held informal  consultations on the Chair's text on capacity building in  developing countries and heard submissions by the G-77/China, the US, EU and Canada. Delegates highlighted,  inter alia: subregional or regional approaches; the need to  consider past and ongoing activities; and the need for a  non-operational role yet a facilitative role for the FCCC  Secretariat. The G-77/China proposed addressing 'financing'  and 'implementation' as separate sections. Uganda said  funding for capacity building should be additional to ODA.

On Thursday, 15 June, delegates considered the revised  Chair's text. The G-77/China proposed additional amendments  that stressed the need for: capacity building to contribute  to sustainable development; partnership with, and  assistance from developed countries; and proper guidance  from intergovernmental organizations, such as the GEF,  UNDP, and the World Bank, to ensure that access to  resources is transparent with clear and less cumbersome  procedures. He also urged moving forward toward concrete  actions. Uganda sought clarification of what is meant by  'centers of excellence,' noting that this could be  interpreted differently. The US stressed that capacity  building should be results-based. The EU suggested inviting  the GEF and UNDP to report on the CDI at SB-13, and  requesting other organizations to report on their capacity  building activities. SBI Chair Ashe invited delegates to  submit their views by 30 June, to allow the FCCC  Secretariat to compile the draft elements for a draft  framework on capacity building in developing countries by  SB-13.

## SOLIDARITY WITH SOUTHERN AFRICAN COUNTRIES, PARTICULARLY  WITH MOZAMBIQUE

At the joint SBI/SBSTA meeting on Friday, 16 June, SBI  Chair Ashe introduced a document containing a  recommendation of the subsidiary bodies for a draft  resolution to be adopted at COP-6 that expresses solidarity  with southern African countries, particularly Mozambique,  following the devastation caused by Cyclone Eline. The  draft resolution was adopted without amendment. Mozambique  thanked delegates for their expression of support.

The draft resolution expresses solidarity with the  people and governments of southern Africa, in particular  Mozambique; invites the international community to lend  immediate assistance; and urges all governments, UN  agencies, intergovernmental organizations, NGOs, the  private sector and the wider community to continue to seek  permanent solutions to climate change, including bringing  the Protocol into force as soon as possible. The text also  invites support for reconstruction efforts in Mozambique  and other southern African States and urges Parties to  increase technical and financial assistance to the  countries affected.

## CLOSING SBI/SBSTA PLENARY

At the final joint SBI/SBSTA meeting on Friday, 16 June,  SBI Chair Ashe drew delegates' attention to the work  programme for the intersessional period leading to COP-6.  He underlined that these workshops will not form part of  negotiations, but are designed to facilitate an exchange of  views on various issues. He then listed the following  upcoming events:informal consultations on mechanisms (6-8 July, in  Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia); a workshop on LULUCF (10-15 July, in Poznan, Poland); consultations on compliance (18-20 July, in Reykjavik,  Iceland); consultations on technology transfer (2-4 August, in  Colorado, USA); an African regional workshop on non-Annex I  communications (14-18 August, in South Africa); and, informal consultations on adverse effects (23-25  August, tentatively planned for Bonn, Germany).

He noted that further consultations on LULUCF and  compliance, as well as an Asian regional meeting on non- Annex I communications, were possible following SB-13. He  also announced that funding would be provided for a second  delegate from each least developed country Party and small  island State Party to attend upcoming sessions.

In the ensuing discussion, several delegates applauded the  move to finance an additional delegate for these Parties.  Many delegates expressed their appreciation for the work of  the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies and contact groups, the  Secretariat and its Executive Secretary, the interpreters  and all those who participated at SB-12. A number of  Parties stressed the importance of transparency leading to  COP-6.

The G-77/China expressed satisfaction at the positive  contribution of SB-12 and the preceding informal meetings  in moving toward achieving the goals set out under the  BAPA. He said the texts developed at SB-12 would serve as a  good basis for negotiations at SB-13. However, he noted  that delegates had yet to enter into the actual negotiating  phase on the key issues, and stressed that the goals for  COP-6 would be achieved only if the significant interests  of all Parties were reflected. Saudi Arabia noted the  progress made during the last two weeks. He applauded the  German Government's agreement with its nuclear industry to  phase-out nuclear energy, and encouraged all Annex I  Parties to follow suit.

The African Group called for concrete actions to emerge  from this process. Uruguay noted the complexity of this  process, but was encouraged by progress at SB-12. He said  sinks should be included within the CDM. Costa Rica called  for a focus on the issues of sinks and mechanisms and noted  that it had prepared a paper on this issue in cooperation  with a group of 14 Latin American countries. India  cautioned against fragmenting the process unnecessarily and  dividing into too many sub-bodies and processes. The US  noted progress on technical matters, but said there was  still considerable work remaining on core issues such as  compliance, the mechanisms, technology transfer, capacity  building, adverse effects, and sinks. The EU said hard work  was required before COP-6, but that the foundations had  been laid at SB-12. Chair Ashe thanked participants for  their contribution to progress, and closed the meeting at  11:50 am.

# A BRIEF ANALYSIS OF SB-12

##     'ARE WE CONCERNED WITH WINNING, OR ARE WE JUST DRIBBLING ABOUT?'

Expressing frustration at the lack of progress during one  of SB-12's contact groups, a Nigerian delegate posed the  question: 'Are we concerned with winning, or are we just  dribbling about?' Perhaps the fact that the EURO 2000  soccer competition had just commenced was foremost in his  mind. However, his query also reflects SB-12's actual role,  which was to help prepare for the ultimate goal of a  meaningful and decisive negotiation at COP-6 rather than  bring the negotiations to any successful outcome or  conclusion at this point. At the close of SB-12, delegates  expressed a general sense of satisfaction that they had  reached their limited, although essential, objective. By  developing negotiating text on key issues for consideration  at SB-13, the two weeks of informal and formal meetings  paved the way for the critical stage of negotiations that  is yet to come.

The informal pre-sessional meetings - a procedural novelty  -allowed for SB-12 to kick-off its sessions following a  valuable capacity- and confidence-building exercise that  set the scene for constructive and positive discussions. As  a result, in the formal sessions, there were some  significant procedural advances. In particular negotiating  texts were elaborated on compliance, mechanisms and adverse  effects, signifying the advent of the next phase of the  process toward adopting decisions at COP-6. Only one  concrete agreement was reached in SBSTA - on guidelines for  national systems under Article 5.1 - and although this may  appear insignificant to some, it is an important step  toward laying the foundations for credible accounting  systems that will support monitoring of compliance and the  use of mechanisms.

This brief analysis will assess the progress made on each  key issue under negotiation under the Buenos Aires Plan of  Action (BAPA).

## BLOWING THE WHISTLE ON INFRINGEMENTS - SETTING THE RULES ON  COMPLIANCE

Like many elements of the BAPA, the negotiations over the  establishment of a compliance system find their roots in  the process leading to COP-3 in Kyoto, where the adoption  of Article 18 (non-compliance) provided the legal basis for  the current work of the JWG. Although negotiations have  moved ahead since COP-3, some elements of Article 18 are  still the object of diverging views. For instance, the  requirement that any legally binding consequences shall be  adopted by means of an amendment to the Protocol will have  an impact on the formal steps needed for the adoption of  the compliance system. However, the bulk of current  discussions cover rather complex 'post-Kyoto' issues. With  the help of several constructive meetings, the JWG has  progressed on several issues, inter alia, the need: to  establish a compliance body; for both facilitative and  enforcement approaches to address non-compliance; for an  expedited procedure to deal with eligibility requirements  to mechanisms; and for the possibility of an appeal for  outcomes of a mandatory nature. The JWG is therefore now in  a good position to continue its work in accordance with the  schedule set out in the BAPA.

Stumbling blocks are still numerous and cover complex  political and legal issues. These include: whether the  compliance system applies to all Parties or only Annex I  Parties; the relationship between the facilitative and  enforcement approaches to non-compliance; whether the  system will be given 'teeth' in terms of mandatory  outcomes; and whether the compliance body will be composed  of a greater number of Annex I Parties.

The number of difficult issues currently on the table  leaves scope for several package-deals within the JWG  between the EU, the G-77/China and other delegations. These  include Article 4 (joint fulfillment), mandatory outcomes  such as financial penalties or loss of access to  mechanisms, composition of the compliance body and scope of  application of the compliance system. Next to this, several  linkages with the work undertaken in other groups, namely  Articles 5, 7 and 8 and mechanisms, and the possibility of  give-and-take outside any predictable framework, for purely  strategic reasons, leave scope for further package deals.

## TACKLING THE MECHANISMS...

Similarly in the debate on mechanisms, an agreement on text  from which negotiations will proceed signified a useful,  businesslike approach. Controversy still remains,  especially with regard to the possible inclusion of sinks- related projects in the CDM, an issue that became more  visible with the release of the new IPCC Special Report on  Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry. Most Latin American  countries favor the inclusion of sinks-related projects in  the CDM. In fact, some countries already have AIJ projects  on sinks that they would like to see converted to CDM  projects in order to acquire Certified Emission Reductions.  The EU and some developing countries oppose the inclusion  of sinks in the CDM, citing the huge uncertainties in sinks  projects, the difficulty in ensuring permanence, and the  tremendous potential for leakage.

The IPCC report does not provide answers to these concerns,  but does provide a scientific basis for further work. This  will be a key issue to watch at COP-6, given the deep  differences between the EU and the US, and between the  Latin American countries and AOSIS. To date, most African  countries, India and China appear to be non-committal, and  are observing how the issue unfolds before deciding on  their game plans.

## ...TRYING TO TACKLE LULUCF

Some delegates who participated in the debate on LULUCF  expressed concern at the pressure to hasten the  negotiations. Although this was expected, since some  Parties tied progress on sinks and a decision at COP-6 to  ratification of the Protocol, many were uneasy about the  implications of a rushed decision on the credibility of the  Protocol.

As a result, while many non-Annex I Parties were playing  for time regarding consideration of the IPCC Special Report  and workshops with a capacity building function, other  Parties tabled concrete work plans for rapid progress  towards decisions at COP-6. By the end of the session,  Parties had barely begun to identify positions regarding  definitions/accounting scenarios and additional human  induced activities. These positions will become more  apparent during the upcoming workshop in Poland as well as  in the 1 August submissions, both of which will set the  stage for Lyon and pose a key test for the environmental  integrity of the Kyoto Protocol.

## INSTANT REPLAY ON ADVERSE EFFECTS?

At first sight, the casual observers could be forgiven for  thinking they were watching a repeat performance of tactics  witnessed last year. During the pre-sessional week, OPEC  countries reiterated their earlier call for 'equal progress  on all issues,' while some Annex I Parties appeared  cautious and on the defensive, particularly on the issue of  the impacts of their response measures to combat climate  change. The continuing insistence by Saudi Arabia and other  oil-producing countries for 'compensation' to offset the  effects of policies and measures to cut fossil fuel  consumption in developed countries remained a sore point.  The stark reality that some Parties are willing to scuttle  the entire process at COP-6 if this issue is not taken  seriously enough was brought to the fore during the  informal sessions, and also raised tensions during some  meetings.

However, on closer inspection, many participants seem to  think progress has been made. In achieving agreement on  text that will form the basis of negotiations at SB-13, the  contact group Co-Chairs charted a difficult line between  the positions taken by the G-77/China, the EU and the  Umbrella Group, an informal alliance of like-minded  developed countries, including Australia, Canada, Japan and  the US. However, with arguments about how quickly this  process should advance and what the substantive outcomes  should be, the real test will come when line-by-line  negotiations begin.

## PLAYING FOR EXTRA TIME ON TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER

Even though the Friends of the Chair group on technology  development and transfer appeared to register progress in  its discussions, many delegates who have followed this  discussion since 1992 were clearly frustrated. They felt  that despite calls to proceed to actions and to identify  how to proceed with the technology issue under the  Convention, there was a clear reluctance by many Annex I  Parties to act. There seemed to be a marked preference for  stalling until the Protocol mechanisms are operational. It  is apparent that conclusive decisions on how technology  transfer could be carried out under the FCCC remains out of  reach, and the same issues will be revisited in Lyon and  beyond.

## HOW PARTIES PERFORMED

Overall, some interesting trends in the performance of the  regional groups were noted at SB-12. Many observers felt  that the EU team appeared less articulate in its positions  on some of the issues in the process, notably when its  attempt to develop text for a draft decision on policies  and measures at COP-6 was kicked out of play. Some  observers attributed this to the fact that the EU has yet  to finalize tactics and positions on key issues that are  still to be resolved at the upcoming EU Ministerial Council  meeting.

Some observers also found the US to be less vocal at this  meeting, even though there was no change in its overall  interest in maximizing the use of the mechanisms in  implementing its commitments. A probable reason for this is  the upcoming presidential election, which requires  downplaying the issues on the domestic front given that the  Clinton administration is operating under the gaze of its  Republican rivals. On the other hand, some feel that the  difference on climate change policies between the election  contenders is not significant enough to have an impact on  the US position.

However, this should not deflect attention from their  interests as well as their behind-the-scenes bilateral  discussions with developing countries, such as Argentina,  China, Colombia and India, with respect to climate change  politics. The litmus test, however, will be to see whether  the US negotiates at SB-13 or defers actual negotiations to  the post-election period at The Hague.

The G-77/China demonstrated proactive participation. Doubts  that had been expressed earlier over Nigeria's chairmanship  of the G-77/China, given its membership in OPEC, fell away  as the group's issue coordinators appeared to have  sufficient flexibility to develop and represent the broader  G-77/China perspectives, such as in LULUCF.

## THE ROAD TO THE 'WORLD COP'

All in all, the constructive atmosphere of SB-12 seemed to  be primarily due to a business-like approach among  participants that took into account the need to move  forward, if the prize of achieving the BAPA is to be  attained at COP-6. However fraught with difficulties the  next few months might be, the SB-12 sessions have been  effective in achieving a better grasp of highly technical  issues, clarifying positions and interests, identifying the  points where progress will be difficult and setting the  expectations at a realistic level for COP-6 and beyond.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR BEFORE COP-6

### THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

THE END OF THE BEGINNING? This meeting  will be held from 19-20 June 2000, in London, UK. It is  been organized be the Royal Institute of International  Affairs (RIIA). For more information, contact: Georgina  Wright, RIIA, Chatham House, 10 St James's Square, London  SW1Y 4LE; tel: +44-20-7957-5700; fax: +44-20-7321-2045; e- mail: info@riia.org; Internet: http://www.riia.org

### INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CLIMATE CHANGE COMMUNICATION

This conference will be held from 22-24 June 2000, in  Kitchener-Waterloo, Canada. It will be hosted by  Environment Canada and the University of Waterloo. For more  information, contact: Jean Andrey, Department of Geography,  University of Waterloo; tel: +1-519-888-4567 x3629; e-mail:  jandrey@fes.uwaterloo.ca; or contact Daniel Scott,  Adaptation and Impacts Research Group, Environment Canada;  tel: +1-519-888-4567 x5497; e-mail:  dj2scott@fes.uwaterloo.ca; Internet:  http://geognt.uwaterloo.ca/c3confer/

### WORLD RENEWABLE ENERGIES CONGRESS

This meeting will be  held from 1-7 July 2000, in Brighton, UK. Hosted by the  World Renewable Energy Network, it is being co-sponsored by  several organizations, including UNESCO, UNDP and the  European Economic Commission. For more information,  contact: A. Sayigh, 147 Hilmanton, Lower Earley, Reading  RG6 4HN, UK; tel: +44-1189-611-364, fax: +44-1189-611-365;  Internet: http://www.wrenuk.co.uk/brighton/topics.html

### FCCC CONSULTATIONS AND WORKSHOPS

A number of workshops and  consultations were announced at SB-12 to assist the process  leading to SB-13, including:informal consultations on mechanisms from 6-8 July, in  Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia; a workshop on LULUCF from 10-15 July, in Poznan,  Poland; consultations on compliance from 18-20 July, in  Reykjavik, Iceland; consultations on technology transfer from 2-4 August,  in Colorado, USA; an African regional workshop on non-Annex I  communications from 14-18 August, in South Africa; and, informal consultations on adverse effects from 23-25  August, tentatively planned for Bonn, Germany.

For more information, contact: the UNFCCC Secretariat; tel:  +49-228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail:  secretariat@unfccc.de; Internet: http://www.unfccc.int

### NATIONAL POLICY ASSOCIATION BREAKFAST SEMINARS ON GLOBAL  WARMING

The US National Policy Association is holding a  series of breakfast seminars during 2000, in Washington DC,  US. For more information, contact: Kaylin Bailey, National  Policy Association; tel: +1-202-884-7628; e-mail:  kbailey@npa1.org.

### INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CLIMATE AND HEALTH IN SMALL  ISLAND STATES

This conference will be held from 24-25 July  2000, in Nadi, Fiji, and is being organized by the  Interagency Network on Climate and Human Health, the WHO,  UNEP and WMO. For more information, contact: H. Ogawa, WHO,  Regional Office for the Western Pacific; fax: +632-521-1036  or 526-0279; e-mail: ogawah@who.org.ph; or C. Corvalán,  Department of Protection of the Human Environment, WHO, CH- 1211, Geneva 27; tel: +41-22-791 4208; e-mail:  corvalanc@who.int; Internet:  http://www.who.int/peh/climate/climate_and_health.htm

### CONGRESS OF THE 29TH INTERNATIONAL GEOGRAPHICAL UNION  COMMISSION ON CLIMATOLOGY

This conference will take place  from 9-13 August 2000, in Seoul, South Korea. The theme of  the conference is 'Climate Change and its Impacts.' For  more information, contact: Hyoun-Young Lee, Department of  Geography, Konkuk University, 93-1, Mojin-dong, Kwangjin- gu, Seoul, 143-701, South Korea; tel: +822-446-6756; fax:  +822-446-8194; e-mail: leekwons@kkucc.konkuk.ac.kr.

### FIFTH INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON GREENHOUSE GAS CONTROL  TECHNOLOGIES (GHGT-5)

This conference will take place from  13-16 August 2000, in Cairns, Australia. For more  information, contact: Colin Paulson, CSIRO Energy  Technology, PO Box 136, North Ryde, NSW 1670, Australia;  tel: +61-2-9490-8790; Internet: http://www.ieagreen.org.uk

### 13TH SESSION OF THE FCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES

SB-13 will be  held from 11-15 September 2000, in Lyon, France, and will  be preceded by one week of informal meetings, including  workshops. For more information, contact: the FCCC  Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999;  e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.de; Internet:  http://www.unfccc.int UN ECE Committee on Sustainable Energy: The Ad Hoc Group of  Experts on Coal and Thermal Power will meet on 25 September  2000. This meeting will be followed directly by the Meeting  of the Committee on Sustainable Energy, which will meet  from 26-28 September. Finally, the Ad Hoc Group of Experts  on Extension of European Electricity Interconnection will  meet on 29 September. All meetings will take place in  Geneva, and will be convened by the UN Economic Commission  for Europe. For more information, contact: Information  Unit, UNECE, Palais des Nations, Room 356, CH - 1211 Geneva  10, Switzerland; tel: +41-22-917-4444; fax: +41-22-917- 0505; e-mail: info.ece@unece.org; Internet:  http://www.unece.org/meetings/meetgen.htm

### EARTH TECHNOLOGIES FORUM

This meeting, organized by the  Alliance for Responsible Atmospheric Policy, will be held  in Washington DC, USA, from 30 October - 1 November 2000.  For more information, contact: Alliance for Responsible  Atmospheric Policy: tel: +1-703-243-0344; e-mail:  alliance98@aol.com; Internet: http://www.earthforum.com/

### SIXTH CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE FRAMEWORK CONVENTION  ON CLIMATE CHANGE

COP-6 will be held in The Hague, the  Netherlands, from 13-24 November 2000. For more  information, contact: the FCCC Secretariat; tel: +49-228- 815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail:  secretariat@unfccc.de; Internet: http://cop6.unfccc.int/