---
title: "REPORT OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES OF THE UN FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE:: 25-28 FEBRUARY 1997"
id: 1240000e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/1240000e
date: 1997-02-28
abstract: "Three of the subsidiary bodies to the UN Framework Convention on  Climate Change (FCCC) met in Bonn, Germany, from 25-28 February  1997: the fifth session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and  Technological Advice (SBSTA-5), the fourth session of the Ad Hoc  Group on Article 13 (AG13-4); and the fifth session of the  Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI-5). The subsidiary bodies  held two concurrent sessions, with the SBI holding six meetings,  the AG13 holding five meetings and the SBSTA holding four  meetings."
---

SBSTA-5 considered a number of issues, including cooperation with  relevant international organizations, activities implemented  jointly under the pilot phase, methodological issues and national  communications. Delegates reached agreement on the Uniform  Reporting Format, requested a work plan for an in-depth review of  second national communications and requested a number of reports  on technology transfer. Delegates also agreed to expand the  technology needs survey instrument. They also noted the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's (IPCC) second and  third technical papers.

AG13-4 made notable progress in further refining the function and  scope of a multilateral consultative process (MCP). Delegates  discussed several iterations of proposals and agreed to a  'framework compilation,' which reflects areas of convergence and  divergence.

SBI-5 considered a number of difficult issues, such as the  programme budget, the review of the financial mechanism and  actions by the Council of the Global Environment Facility (GEF).  Discussions were complex and often lengthy, but delegates agreed  on the timetable and process for review of the programme budget,  which will be discussed in further detail at SBI-6. They also  agreed on the FCCC input to the UN General Assembly Special  Session to review the implementation of Agenda 21 and the  arrangements for the third meeting of the Conference of the  Parties (COP-3). SBI-5 could not agree on the review of the  financial mechanism or the activities of the GEF and will  continue its discussions during the meeting of the Ad Hoc Group  on the Berlin Mandate from 3-7 March 1997.

# OPENING CEREMONY

On Tuesday, 25 February, Executive Secretary Michael Zammit- Cutajar opened the meetings of the FCCC subsidiary bodies at  10:00 am in the Stadthalle Bad Godesberg in Bonn, Germany. He  noted that this meeting marks a new phase in the history of the  FCCC. For the first time delegates have assembled at the new seat  of the secretariat, which will become the base for one of the  most important international negotiating processes. Bonn Mayor  Bärbel Dieckmann welcomed participants to Bonn and said the city  intends to become a center for addressing international  environment and development issues. Parliamentary Secretary  Walter Hirche, on behalf of German Environment Minister Angela  Merkel, stated that Germany's willingness to host the secretariat  demonstrates the high priority it places on the issue of climate  change. He called for accelerated negotiations towards an  ambitious protocol with strong reduction targets.

# SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE

Chair Tibor Farago (Hungary) opened the fifth session of the  Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA-5)  on 25 February 1997. He stressed the need for work on  methodological issues, technology transfer and activities  implemented jointly (AIJ). The Executive Secretary called for a  firm calendar for future meetings to facilitate preparations. He  also pointed to linkages between the SBSTA, AGBM and SBI.  TANZANIA, on behalf of the G-77/CHINA, recalled that negotiations  should not diverge from the COP mandate. BAHRAIN inquired about  embassy access to negotiation information. Following a request  from SBSTA-4, the Chair established contact groups on AIJ and  methodological issues. The SBSTA deferred the election of  officers because consultations with the Chair were still  underway. On 28 February, the Chair noted progress on the  election of officers and said an agreement should be concluded  the following week.

## COOPERATION WITH RELEVANT INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

On 25 February, the secretariat introduced the document on  cooperation with relevant international organizations  (FCCC/SBSTA/1997/2). The report addresses coordination between  the SBSTA and international organizations, such as the World  Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the International  Oceanographic Commission (IOC). The report also highlights the  Climate Agenda, a framework to coordinate international climate  research programmes and activities. The Agenda's major partners  include WMO, UNEP, UNESCO, IOC, WHO and FAO. The WMO introduced  the Annex to FCCC/SBSTA/1997/2 on international coordinated  research and systematic observations programmes, which provides a  summary report of activities supporting Article 5 (Research and  Systematic Observation). The WMO also noted the WHO/WMO/UNEP  report entitled 'Climate Change and Human Health' and introduced  the Interagency Network on Climate and Human Health.

A number of delegations, including TRINIDAD and TOBAGO, on behalf  of the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS), and ZIMBABWE,  stressed the importance of Article 5 to developing countries.  MALAYSIA recognized Article 5 as a basic building block for the  Convention and urged the SBSTA to take the lead in  implementation. The US stressed the need for greater clarity on  the intended role of the GEF regarding Article 5. A number of  countries, including the PHILIPPINES, KUWAIT and CANADA, said  that the SBSTA should not invite the GEF to support Parties'  efforts on improving systematic observations. The PHILIPPINES  said that international organizations are not responsible for  capacity building. The US noted confusion about whether the SBSTA  should function as clearinghouse, implementation agency or  funding source. CHINA urged that cooperation between  international organizations should take place under the COP  assisted by the SBSTA.

ARGENTINA, the US and IRAN expressed concerns regarding  participation of developing countries in scientific programmes.  ARGENTINA noted insufficient information on the effects of  climate change in the Southern Hemisphere. MALAYSIA called for  the establishment of long-term climate monitoring stations in  developing countries. The EU suggested that research and  systematic observations be combined with capacity building and  training. SWITZERLAND expressed concern that the WMO's summary  report does not adequately address economic and human aspects of  climate change. CANADA and AUSTRALIA urged continued development  of national programmes.

IPCC Chair Bert Bolin reported on the status of forthcoming IPCC  reports and introduced two technical papers on climate models and  stabilization of atmospheric greenhouse gases. An additional  technical paper on implications of emissions limitations and  reduction proposals, to be completed by September 1997, would  synthesize existing data and not require new research. KUWAIT,  supported by NIGERIA and VENEZUELA, said Parties, rather than the  IPCC, should determine the nature of this paper. VENEZUELA called  for a special report rather than a technical paper. The US,  supported by AOSIS, responded that the SBSTA had instructed the  IPCC to provide a technical paper. The IPCC Chair said that the  IPCC made the decision to prepare this paper in consultation with  the SBSTA.

AOSIS, the MARSHALL ISLANDS, the US and AUSTRALIA also called for  speedy completion of the technical papers. Several delegations,  including the EU and VENEZUELA, called for analysis of socio- economic impacts of different limitation proposals. AUSTRALIA  urged that such analysis not delay research on temperature and  sea level rise. With regard to the IPCC's long-term work  programme, the US suggested giving priority to regional and local  impacts, and urged securing funds and resources for timely  translation and distribution of documents. KUWAIT proposed  requesting the IPCC to take note of country submissions,  contained in FCCC/SBSTA/1997/Misc.2.

In its draft recommendations, the SBSTA recognized the importance  of national activities and coordination of international  organizations for the Climate Agenda. It also noted the need for  adequate resources to improve systematic observation and  research, especially in developing countries. The SBSTA requested  Climate Agenda participants to provide periodic work reports to  SBSTA and requests the secretariat, the WMO and other  organizations to report on observation, research and capacity- building needs.

Several of SBSTA's conclusions concern the IPCC's technical  papers. The SBSTA noted completion of technical papers on simple  climate models (TP2) and global stabilization of atmospheric  greenhouse gas concentrations (TP3). The conclusions also note  that the IPCC Chair's report on the Technical Paper on  Implications of Emissions Limitations and Reduction Proposals  (TP4) was discussed at length and delegates expressed divergent  views. The Chair emphasized that the Joint Working Group (JWG) is  not a decision-making body and that TP4 discussions concerning  the JWG should be viewed as advisory. The SBSTA requested the  IPCC, in developing TP4, to consider document FCCC/SBSTA/  1997/Misc.2, which contains contributions from seven Parties.

## COMMUNICATIONS FROM ANNEX I AND NON-ANNEX I PARTIES

On 25 February, the secretariat made a short report on the  progress achieved in the process of national communications from  Annex I Parties, on the facilitation of assistance to non-Annex I  Parties and the preparation of their national communications, and  on responses from non-Annex I Parties on the expected date for  submission of their communications. The UK noted that its  national communications demonstrate progress toward reducing  emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000. JAPAN urged prompt  review of communication results and welcomed the informal  workshop. The EU hoped for upcoming workshops, input from the  secretariat and submissions from Parties addressing technology  transfer issues.

In the draft conclusions on national communications from Annex I  Parties, the SBSTA notes the secretariat's report regarding  review of first national communications from Annex I Parties. The  SBSTA encourages Annex I Parties to submit their second national  communications and inventory by 15 April 1997 or in accordance  with the COP-2 decision concerning countries with economies in  transition. The SBSTA also requests a work plan from the  secretariat on an in-depth review of these submissions.

In the draft conclusions on national communications from non- Annex I countries, the SBSTA recalled Articles 12.5 (initial  communications) and Article 4.3 (financial resources for  developing countries) and noted that least-developed countries  may prepare initial communications at their discretion,  developing country Parties have yet to receive funding for  initial national communications and others have yet to request  such funding. SBSTA recalled Decision 10/CP.2, which requests the  Convention secretariat to facilitate assistance to Parties,  especially developing country Parties, via workshops and other  forms of information and to report to the SBSTA at each of its  sessions.

Parties did not reach agreement on funding for voluntary  communications of inventories from non-Annex I Parties. The G-77/CHINA stated that available, voluntary inventories would be  communicated 'should the full costs of inventory preparation be  provided by the operating entity of the financial mechanism.' The  PHILIPPINES supported the G-77/CHINA and called for reference to  Article 11.5 (bilateral, multilateral and regional support). The  US warned that these recommendations would prohibit voluntary  submissions from countries with other funding arrangements. The  EU urged that budgetary matters be addressed by the SBI. Parties  did not reach agreement on the paragraph concerning funding for  communications of inventories. The paragraph was deleted and the  decision was adopted.

## METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES

On 25 February, the Chair noted relationships between cooperation  with international organizations and methodological issues and  established an informal group on this issue. The informal group  produced draft recommendations, which noted a JWG recommendation  that the IPCC, cooperating with other institutions and the FCCC  secretariat, 'should take the lead' on methods for GHG  inventories, climate change impacts, and socio-economic cost- benefit analyses. The secretariat, in consultation with the IPCC  and other relevant organizations, was asked to develop a work  programme based on the methodological tasks in document  FCCC/SBSTA/1996/20.

The issues are: assessing mitigation measures and policies and  adaptation options; projecting emissions; evaluating and  monitoring the effectiveness of specific policies and measures;  assessing mitigation and adaptation technologies; assessing the  impact of climate change; and performing a socio-economic cost  benefit analysis of adaptation and mitigation options. The SBSTA  requested Parties to submit information and proposals on  methodological activities by 15 April 1997. These recommendations  were adopted without further discussion.

## MECHANISMS FOR CONSULTATION WITH NGOS

Discussions on mechanisms and procedures for consultation with  NGOs were postponed until the next meeting of the SBSTA, because  the secretariat's documentation was not complete. The EU  expressed its wish for more NGO involvement and called for prompt  attention to consultation mechanisms. In the draft conclusion,  the SBSTA requested the secretariat to prepare its document on  mechanisms for consultation for the next subsidiary body session  and invited SBI-6 to consider it.

## DEVELOPMENT & TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGIES

The secretariat introduced the progress report on technology and  technology transfer (FCCC/SB/1991/1) and FCCC/SBSTA/1997/ Misc.1  and Add.1 containing submissions by non-Annex I countries on  technology needs. The secretariat noted the need to review  activities underway on technology and information centers and  networks, and reported on the survey of technology and  information needs conducted in conjunction with the University of  Amsterdam. Luis Villanueva (Venezuela) reported on the informal  SBI workshop on aspects of implementation of policies and  measures by Annex I Parties. JAPAN then reported on work of the  Climate Technology Initiative (CTI) to strengthen National Action  Plans, increase use of existing climate friendly technology and  improve new technology.

A number of countries welcomed the progress report and requested  that the secretariat conduct further surveys of technology and  technology information needs. A number of countries, including  the EU, the US and CANADA, stressed the importance of the CTI.  The G-77/CHINA urged removal of restrictions on technology  transfer. The US called for a focus on commercial investment in  cleaner technologies in developing countries and on assessments  of needs. MALAYSIA said that many technologies are only available  commercially. The EU, CANADA and THAILAND also stressed the role  of the private sector in technology transfer. MAURITIUS said that  governments must approve transfer of technologies from commercial  firms. The MARSHALL ISLANDS and CHINA said that solutions do not  lie with the private sector.

The G-77/CHINA, supported by KIRIBATI, MALAYSIA, NIGERIA, the  MARSHALL ISLANDS, THAILAND, INDIA and TANZANIA, said fulfillment  of developing countries' commitments depends on the provision of  resources and technology transfer and is the basis for all  negotiations, including AGBM discussions. They requested the  secretariat to prepare a progress report on technology transfer  by developed countries and expressed concern that little progress  had been made on the promotion and transfer of adaptation  technology. They further proposed that the SBSTA establish an  intergovernmental technical advisory panel (ITAP). The difference  between AIJ and technology transfer was also stressed.

THAILAND and INDIA noted the importance of endogenous capacity  building in developing countries. A number of countries,  including the EU, the G-77/CHINA, MALAYSIA, CANADA, SAUDI ARABIA,  NIGERIA and THAILAND, emphasized the importance of specialized  information centers and networks. The US cautioned that such  centers should not replicate existing capabilities. INDIA also  advocated use of existing technology information centers.  AUSTRALIA said that its technology transfer efforts coincide with  needs outlined by CHINA: environmentally sound, appropriate for  users, driven by recipient countries, and involving hard and soft  technology. The GEF provided an update on its Science and  Technology Advisory Panel (STAP), which is working closely with  the SBSTA to study technology transfer and identify promising  technologies.

Informal consultations resulted in the following draft  conclusions. The SBSTA urged the secretariat to accelerate  preparation of reports on terms of transfer, adaptation  technology and technology information centers, and to complete  the itemized progress report by SBSTA-7 on access to and transfer  of technology based on Annex I communications. SBSTA further  requested the secretariat to expand the technology needs survey  instrument, to prepare a report on existing centers and networks,  to update the technology inventory for SBSTA-7 and to prepare a  scoping paper on the role of the private sector and activities of  governments and international bodies in creating conditions for  commercial investment in cleaner technologies. CHINA and the  PHILIPPINES wanted to add that it is mainly the role of Annex II  Parties to carry out such activities. CANADA and the US did not  agree. The Chair suggested compromise text: 'taking into account  the special role of Annex I Parties and the special conditions of  non-Annex I countries.' SBSTA further requested the secretariat to report on experiences  in using a roster of experts. The G-77/CHINA added that many  Parties urged SBSTA to set up ITAPs without delay. The US,  supported by the EU, stressed institutional problems of ITAPs and  said establishment of an ITAP should await completion of the  evaluation report. MALAYSIA added that the SBSTA shall address  this issue at its next session. Furthermore, the SBSTA requested  Parties to provide information on technology needs and urged non- Annex I Parties to cooperate in the survey. The draft conclusions  were adopted, as amended.

## ACTIVITIES IMPLEMENTED JOINTLY UNDER THE PILOT PHASE

On 27 February 1997, delegates discussed activities implemented  jointly (AIJ) under the pilot phase and the Uniform Reporting  Format (FCCC/SBSTA/1997/3) and a document containing comments  from Parties on methodological issues pertaining to AIJ  (FCCC/SBSTA/1997/Misc.3). The G-77/CHINA, supported by ZIMBABWE,  recalled that the concept of Joint Implementation (JI) only  applies to Annex I countries, and that AIJ does not provide for  crediting. He said that AIJ worked on a voluntary basis, and that  it cannot be a conditionality for technology transfer. AIJ should  be reviewed in 1999. Annex I countries should not assume that  they would implement the Protocol or other legal instrument  though JI. He suggested requesting the secretariat to prepare a  report on the long-term consequences of AIJ on developing  countries. ZIMBABWE emphasized that AIJ must be nationally  driven. The US urged that the SBSTA take up the issue of  crediting at its next session. The EU said that Parties should  resubmit their reports according to the new uniform reporting  framework. He proposed requesting the secretariat to organize a  workshop on baselines and monitoring procedures. JAPAN also  stressed the importance of institutional arrangements in host  countries.

A contact group was established to consider the Uniform Reporting  Format and the list of methodological issues. The group  considered the annexes to the document on this issue from SBSTA-4  (FCCC/SBSTA/1996/15), which was still open for discussion.

As a result of these informal consultations, the SBSTA adopted  and decided to keep under regular review the Uniform Reporting  Format contained in annexes 1 and 2 to the draft conclusions  (FCCC/SBSTA/1997/L.1). The SBSTA invited Parties to report on AIJ  under the pilot phase using the adopted format. The SBSTA also  recalled that the submission deadline for contributions to the  synthesis report for COP-3 is 30 June 1997. Annex 3 to the draft  conclusions contains a list of methodological issues related to  AIJ. These include determination of benefits, measurement,  reporting and assessment, endogenous capacity-building, transfer  of technologies, costs, incentive structures and institutional  arrangements. SBSTA requested the secretariat to develop  practical options on these issues and to report on the progress  made.

The meeting was adjourned on Friday, 28 February, at 1:00 pm.

# SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION

SBI Chair Mohamed Ould El-Ghaouth (Mauritania) opened the fifth  session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI-5) on  Tuesday, 25 February. He noted that SBI-5 must take definitive  decisions and, because no SBI meeting is scheduled during COP-3,  the group must discharge all its duties beforehand.

FCCC Executive Secretary Michael Zammit-Cutajar addressed a  number of items on the SBI agenda. On the review of the financial  mechanism, he stated that the GEF needs a predictable demand from  the Convention if it is to conduct a successful replenishment,  and Parties must send a clear and timely signal regarding their  future intentions. On support for initial communications by non- Annex I Parties, he said there is an urgent need for a support  arrangement consisting of: a concerted 'marketing' effort to  ensure that all eligible Parties have access to financial  resources; a central point for collecting information on the  progress of communication projects; and a programme to enable  groups of countries to exchange experiences.

Regarding the election of the SBI's officers, the Chair noted  that the issue must be postponed until later in the meeting as  consultations were still underway. On 26 February, the Chair  reported that José Romero (Switzerland) was elected Vice- President of the SBI and Patricia Iturregui Byrne (Peru) as  Rapportuer.

## NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS

On 25 February, the secretariat introduced the document on  national communications from Parties included in Annex I to the  Convention (FCCC/SB/1997/INF.1). The report describes the  progress made with regard to in-depth reviews of first national  communications, including two tables listing countries and their  progress. The US expressed concerns about the costs of in-depth  reviews of national communications and noted that reviews may not  be cost-efficient. The FCCC Executive Secretary stated that the  funds for the reviews are received from the core UN budget, and  are not extra-budgetary spending. He offered to provide the  delegates with a programme budget paper in a few days, in  addition to the planned complete budget overview in July. The EU  expressed concern about the progress of the review process itself  and called on all governments to support it. The UK stressed that  existing commitments to prepare national communications are as  important as future commitments resulting from the Berlin  Mandate. The PHILIPPINES requested resuming discussions on the  issue after the informal workshop on national communications.

This workshop was convened on Wednesday, 26 February, and chaired  by Katsunori Suzuki (Japan). In his report on 27 February, Mr.  Suzuki stated that the workshop discussed energy subsidies,  environmental legislation and voluntary agreements. Regarding  energy subsidies, he noted that several countries are undertaking  reforms to introduce competition and market conditions in the  energy sectors, including the removal of subsidies,  privatization, deregulation and decentralization of decisions.

Participants also noted, inter alia, that subsidies for fossil  fuel production, which are often motivated by important social  concerns, can counteract policies and measures taken to mitigate  climate change. The removal of subsidies could be painful in the  short term but can bring significant economic and environmental  benefits. Regarding environmental legislation, participants noted  that countries with economies in transition are presently  undertaking major reforms to facilitate transition to market- based economies. This involves the removals of subsidies on  energy prices, allocation of property rights, changes in  legislation and decentralization of executive powers. Regarding  voluntary agreements, participants noted that voluntary  agreements between government and industry, as well as other  stakeholders, could be effective for mitigating greenhouse gas  emissions.

On Friday, 28 February, the SBI considered the Chair's draft  conclusions on communications from Annex I Parties  (FCCC/SBI/1997/L.1). The conclusions state that the SBI  encouraged Annex I Parties to submit their second national  communications and inventory data by 15 April 1997. The SBI  welcomed the informal workshop held at this session and concluded  that the workshop served a useful purpose in allowing Parties and  observers to exchange information and views on the implementation  aspects of specific policies and measures. The SBI also requested  the secretariat to explore the possibility of exchanging  information by convening workshops on specific topics in  conjunction with future SBI sessions. CHINA noted the costs and  the inconsistent quality of workshops. He said the workshops  should be convened 'when and where necessary.' The conclusions  were adopted as amended.

Regarding communications from non-Annex I Parties, the Chair's  draft conclusions state that the SBI took note of the activities  underway by the secretariat to facilitate the provision of  support to non-Annex I Parties for the preparation of their  national communications. SBI requests the secretariat to continue  to report at future SBI sessions on further progress achieved.  CHINA, supported by the CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC, requested that  future progress reports should be prepared, bearing in mind COP-2  Decision 10, which requests the secretariat to report on its  activities. The CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC requested a reference to  Article 12.4 (assistance to developing countries) and Article 4.3  (agreed full costs for developing countries). The US noted that  the GEF received little response from non-Annex I Parties when it  requested information about their needs in preparing their  national communications. BURKINA FASO and ALGERIA stressed that  procedures to deal with the GEF can be very cumbersome and that  efforts made by non-Annex I Parties must be recognized. The  conclusions were adopted as amended.

## FINANCIAL AND TECHNICAL COOPERATION

### REVIEW OF THE FINANCIAL MECHANISM

On Wednesday, 26 February, the  secretariat introduced the document, 'Financial mechanism: review  process referred to in decision 9/CP.1' (FCCC/SBI/1997/2), which  contains information prepared by the GEF to assist the SBI in its  review of the financial mechanism. The document recalls decision  9/CP.1, which calls for initiation of a review process for the  financial mechanism and for taking appropriate measures,  including a determination of the definitive status of the GEF.  COP-2 requested SBI-4 to undertake this review process. The  document updates the report presented by the GEF to COP-2 by  providing new information on project financing for the period  May-December 1996. The document also highlights other relevant  information presented in earlier reports.

The G-77/CHINA stressed the importance of the review, but noted  that the document was received rather late and full consideration  could not be completed immediately. He said the review could  begin at this session and delegates could benefit from the  discussions at the upcoming Special Session of the UN General  Assembly. He also emphasized the need to increase the GEF's  resources. CHINA said the disbursement process should be  streamlined and more flexible. COLOMBIA said a review of the  financial mechanism this year is premature and more time is  needed to examine the results of the GEF's investment projects.  IRAN stated that one session would not be sufficient for adequate  consideration of the review process. The DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S  REPUBLIC OF KOREA stated that the GEF does not function  efficiently and some projects took three years to get approved.

The EU noted progress on the operational strategy and the  Memorandum of Understanding between the GEF and the FCCC. He  emphasized the importance of a review every four years to ensure  the GEF's conformity with COP guidance, the effectiveness of its  projects and the provision of adequate resources. He noted that  agreement on details at this session would help establish the  role of the GEF and clarify outstanding issues pertaining to its  forthcoming replenishment. CANADA said that in addition to  discrete projects, the review should also address elements, such  as the GEF's ability to cooperate with other international  organizations, leverage resources and 'mainstream' environmental  concerns. The Chair noted the lack of resources and time during  the intersessional period. Delegates agreed to suspend discussion  of the document to allow more time for review and to revisit the  issue in an informal process. On Friday, 28 February, the Chair  announced that the informal group on this issue would not  complete its work by the end of the week. As a result, the SBI  will reconvene during the AGBM meeting to consider the informal  group's conclusions.

### INFORMATION ON RELEVANT ACTION BY THE GEF COUNCIL

The  secretariat introduced the document on relevant action by the GEF  Council (FCCC/SBI/1997/Misc.1). The document recalls Decision 10  from COP-2, which requested the secretariat to provide  information on the financial support available to non-Annex I  Parties for the preparation of their national communications. The  document contains information on projects proposed by Parties,  funding decisions and date and amount of funds available. The EU  noted that the interim operating entity is functioning  effectively and that the GEF will be a 'cross-point' for the flow  of technology. Delegates agreed to suspend discussion of the  document to allow more time for review and to revisit the issue  in an informal process. On Friday, 28 February, the Chair  announced that the informal group on this issue would not  complete its work by the end of the week. The SBI will reconvene  during the AGBM to consider its conclusions.

## DEVELOPMENT & TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGIES

On 25 February, the Chair noted the SBI's intention to discuss  the issue of development and transfer of technology on Thursday,  27 February, and also highlighted the secretariat's progress  report on the issue (FCCC/SB/1997/1). The Chair proposed that the  SBI defer consideration of the issue to the SBSTA and allow the  SBSTA to refer matters to the SBI when appropriate. On 28  February, the SBI accepted conclusions taking note of the  workshop on technology transfer. The SBI decided to defer the  consideration of this issue and to request the SBSTA to refer  relevant issues as necessary.

## ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL MATTERS

### PROGRAMME BUDGET FOR 1998-99 - PERSPECTIVES ON FINANCIAL  REQUIREMENT

On Tuesday, 25 February, the Executive Secretary  introduced the document 'Administrative and Financial Matters -  Programme Budget for 1998-1999: Perspectives on financial  requirements' (FCCC/SBI/1997/3). The document outlines the  approach of the Executive Secretary in constructing a new work  programme that aims to deliver the outputs demanded by the  Parties in the next biennium and to support the intergovernmental  structure that they have established. The building blocks are  sub-programmes corresponding to the main tasks that the  secretariat is currently required to perform and are expected to  continue through the next biennium. The document also contains: a  proposed timetable and process for the consideration and adoption  of the programme budget; a section addressing uncertainties and  issues on which the Executive Secretary is seeking guidance; and  preliminary resource estimates for the core budget. The document  envisages that the work of the secretariat for the biennium 1998- 1999 will be organized into six programmes: policy-making organs;  executive direction and management; science and technology;  implementation; conference management and information services;  and resources, planning and coordination.

CHINA, supported by the EU, CANADA, JAPAN and the US, welcomed  the document and requested more time for its consideration.  CANADA and JAPAN also requested more detailed information on  specific sections of the document.

On Thursday, 27 February, the Chair distributed additional  information on items such as: options on the preliminary  estimated costs for conference services; estimates of the costs  related to the in-depth reviews in 1996; and estimated staffing  of the secretariat for 1998-99. The Executive Secretary expressed  the need for guidance on content, the calendar of meetings, the  question of providing for an intergovernmental process after COP- 3, and liaison arrangements in Geneva and New York. He also  requested advice on how to prepare for the possibility that the  UN General Assembly might discontinue financial support for  conference services.

The G-77/CHINA stated that the budget must be prepared with  maximum transparency and simplicity, and active, informed  participation of all Parties. As for the post-Kyoto process, he  stated that references to analytical work on flexibility  provisions, such as emissions trading, are unacceptable. He  reaffirmed the commitment of developing countries to preparing  initial communications, but requested the deletion of a paragraph  on reviews of national communications. He requested the  secretariat to provide to SBI-6: a comparative table of current  and future budgets elaborated sector-by-sector; a table  indicating different secretariat sectors and their current and  1998 activities; tables on estimated staff for the biennium 1998- 1999; and any other information that could facilitate extensive  discussion of the budget by the SBI. CHINA and MALAYSIA expressed  concern regarding a reference to peer review of national  communications and emissions trading. CHINA also said it is  premature to have a budget item for an MCP while consultations  are ongoing. ARGENTINA supported the option for conference  services that allows for contracting translation services from a  UN source and interpretation and other sources from commercial  contractors.

The EU stated that the issue could be advanced by informal  discussions before SBI-6. He requested an explanation for the  preliminary increase in professional staff and said it was  premature to include the IPCC in the science and technology  programme when its relationship to the secretariat is not yet  clear. On non-Annex I Party communications, he said that  activities should be considered in detail at a later stage. He  expressed the hope that 52nd session of General Assembly will  decide that conference services for the FCCC will still be in the  budget.

The US recognized that the secretariat should coordinate work on  developing methodologies but should not undertake the work  itself. On conference services, the US supported contracting all  services from individual or corporate contractors. He said FCCC  contributions to the IPCC budget should stay below 15 percent to  ensure its independence and expressed concern at the magnitude of  post-Kyoto staff and budget increases. JAPAN also expressed  concern regarding the total amount of resources and requested  more information on how increases will be accounted for. He  proposed revisiting the issue of the post-Kyoto budget in July.

Regarding liaison offices, the US, supported by CANADA, proposed  performing periodic visits rather than maintaining liaison  offices in New York and Geneva. JAPAN proposed cooperative  arrangements for liaison arrangements. The DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S  REPUBLIC OF KOREA noted that a liaison office in Geneva was  essential for developing countries that have missions in Geneva  but not in Bonn. COLOMBIA drew the attention of donor countries  to the fund for developing country participation and underscored  its importance in light of the move to Bonn.

Responding to questions, the Executive Secretary said the  document was intended to provoke reactions and, based on  delegates' comments, had indeed been 'provocative.' He said the  full programme budget would contain more information and noted  that requests for direct comparisons between future and current  expenditures present a problem because some current budget items  have been spread among other programmes. He also noted that the  proposed budget attempts to estimate the resources necessary for  the post-Kyoto sessions. An informal group convened during the  evening to further discuss the budget.

On Friday, 28 February, delegates considered the Chair's draft  conclusions (FCCC/SBI/1997/L.1), which note that the SBI endorses  a timetable and process for review and adoption of the programme  budget for the biennium 1998-1999. The timetable states, inter  alia, that: a comprehensive programme budget will be proposed for  consideration and complete review at SBI-6 in July; the  recommended decision will provide a total budget with allocations  by programme, a secretariat-wide staffing table and a provision  enabling the Executive-Secretary to switch resources among  programmes within limits; some elements of the budget may have to  be recommended as contingencies; and Parties will be notified of  their indicative contributions to the core budget by 1 October  1997.

The draft conclusions also note that the SBI requests the  Executive Secretary to propose a programme budget for the  biennium 1998-1999 for consideration at SBI-6, taking account  views expressed by delegations at SBI-5. The SBI also requests  the Chair to consider convening broadly representative informal  intersessional consultations to facilitate agreement on the  programme budget at SBI-6.

CHINA said that the SBI should consider informal intersessional  consultations to facilitate agreement on the programme budget 'if  feasible.' On the request for a programme budget, the EU proposed  stating that 'several delegations noted the proposed increase of  the budget and expressed concerns that a full justification  should be made before it is agreed.' In addition, the EU proposed  a 'detailed' programme budget and specific outputs from each  programme. CHINA proposed noting that 'many delegations stressed  that any budget proposal must be in line with the Convention  provisions and the relevant COP decisions.' The US opposed the  'Christmas tree' additions and suggested retaining the existing  paragraph. The US also noted that he would make additional  proposals if the proposals of the EU and CHINA were accepted.  CHINA suggested, as an alternative, taking 'full' account of the  views expressed. The CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC expressed its  preference for including the two additional sentences. Delegates  discussed the issue at length and agreed to postpone further  discussion to allow time for consultations.

In the afternoon, the EU proposed that the budget be submitted  for consideration 'and discussion' and that the informal  intersessional consultations will facilitate 'possible' agreement  on the budget. Delegates agreed to language calling for a  'detailed' budget that specifies the output of each programme for  full consideration and discussion at SBI-6. Intersessional  consultations will be held, if feasible, to facilitate possible  agreement.

### VOLUME OF DOCUMENTATION

Decision 17 from COP-2 called on Parties  to limit requests for additional documentation and the volume of  comments submitted. The Executive Secretary was also requested to  submit further options for reducing the costs of documentation  for meetings under the COP. The annotated agenda notes that the  secretariat will not be able to propose options for reducing  costs until after SBI-5, when necessary information and  statistics will be available.

On Thursday, 27 February, the Executive Secretary distributed  draft conclusions on documentation for discussion in an informal  session that evening. On Friday, 28 February, delegates  considered the draft conclusions in document FCCC/SBI/1997/L.1,  which notes that the secretariat requires more time and will  submit recommendations to SBI-6. The conclusions also request the  Executive Secretary to explore the possibility that, when  justified, each language version of the documentation may be  distributed as it becomes available. CHINA requested an  additional sentence referring to the importance of paper document  distribution to developing countries, as many of them lack  Internet connections. The text was adopted as amended.

## LEGAL MATTERS

On Thursday, 27 February, the secretariat informed the SBI about  the implementation of the Headquarters Agreement. COP-2, in  Decision 15 of COP-2, approved the Agreement, which will enter  into force as soon as the German Parliament has adopted the  required legislation. In December 1996, the Government of Germany  issued an ordinance on the provisional application of the  Agreement. The secretariat also informed the SBI on action taken  by the Convention depositary. It was decided that the SBI will  recommend to COP-3 to consider the request from the Czech  Republic and the Slovak Republic to delete the name of  Czechoslovakia from Annex I to the Convention and add the names  of the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic to Annex I (Part  II, Section III of FCCC/CP/1996/15/Add.1, para.1).

On Friday, 28 February, delegates adopted the Chair's conclusions  on these issues (FCCC/SBI/1997/L.1). The conclusions take note of  the actions of the German government and recommend to the COP to  take up the requests form the Czech and Slovak Republics when it  reviews the lists of Annexes I and II to the Convention.

## MATTERS ARISING FROM THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

On Wednesday, 26 February, the Chair noted that the input from  the FCCC to the Special Session of the General Assembly, to be  held in June 1997, must be addressed at this SBI session. He  noted that a draft has been prepared (FCCC/SBI/1997/4) and an  informal group chaired by Takao Shibata (Japan) will address the  issue. KUWAIT noted that COP-2 took note of, 'but did not adopt'  the Geneva Ministerial Declaration and that a later reference to  the Geneva Ministerial Declaration should be coupled with a  reference to another statement adopted by those delegations that  did not support the Declaration. The US urged the informal group  to use agreed-upon references. On 27 February, Shibata informed  the SBI that the informal group had been unable to meet because  delegates were attending other meetings. He requested interested  delegations to submit written comments.

On 28 February, Shibata presented the draft conclusions of the  informal group. The conclusions note, inter alia: the linkages of  the FCCC and the framework of Agenda 21; the second compilation  of national communications; the work of the IPCC and its steps  toward a Third Assessment Report; and the first steps to deal  with rising emissions, such as the Geneva Declaration. It also  states that the General Assembly may wish to focus on priority  issues, such as how developing countries can acquire the levels  of energy needed for development while avoiding emissions of  greenhouse gases. CHINA said that the reference to avoiding  greenhouse gas emissions was unacceptable because they occur  naturally. He stated that the conclusions were too heavily  directed at developing countries and depart from the Convention's  spirit. Delegates agreed to convene another informal group to  reconsider the conclusions.

In the evening, the revised conclusions were introduced, which  state that the FCCC has received 165 instruments of ratification  or accession, assuring almost universal membership of States.  They also state that a second compilation and synthesis of  national communications was submitted to COP-2, demonstrating  that Annex I Parties need to take additional measures to achieve  the aim of lowering emissions. In addition, the conclusions note  the importance of the IPCC, whose Second Assessment Report is  considered to be the most comprehensive and authoritative  assessment available of scientific and technical information  regarding global climate change. The conclusions also note first  steps to address rising emissions, such as COP-1's agreement on  the Berlin Mandate and COP-2's call for acceleration of  negotiations of the text of a protocol or other legal instrument.  The General Assembly Special Session may wish to encourage member  States to agree on satisfactory results at COP-3. Also noted are  the GEF's efforts to support developing country Parties.

The CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC proposed a reference to 'human'  capacity building. The text was adopted as amended.

Regarding action by the General Assembly at its 51st Session, the  SBI took note of the action and requested the Executive Secretary  to report on the review of administrative arrangement at its  sixth session.

## ARRANGEMENTS FOR INTERGOVERNMENTAL MEETINGS

The Executive Secretary introduced the document 'Arrangements for  intergovernmental meetings' (FCCC/SBI/ 1997/5). He referred to  arrangements at COP-3 in Kyoto and noted a Bureau recommendation  that, due to the timing of COP-3 in late 1997, COP-4 could be  held early in 1999. COP-4 will be held in Bonn unless a  government offers to host it. Regarding the calendar of meetings  for 1997-1999, he pointed out that meetings in 1998-1999 need to  be scheduled soon to ensure availability of conference facilities  in Bonn.

The G-77/CHINA, supported by CHINA and BOTSWANA, expressed  concern about the late distribution of documents for the current  session. He recalled that the recommendation to hold COP-4 in  early 1999 was made known via document FCCC/1996/INF.4 during the  December 1996 sessions. At the close of SBSTA-5, a statement was  made on behalf of the G-77/CHINA expressing concern about this  recommendation. In addition, according to Article 7.4, a COP  meeting should take place every year unless otherwise decided by  the COP. He requested COP-3 to review this issue. The Chair  decided to leave this issue pending.

On Friday, 28 February, delegates considered the Chair's draft  conclusions on COP-3, contained in FCCC/SBI/1997/L.1. The  conclusions request the Executive Secretary to provide a note to  SBI-6 containing a list of possible elements for the provisional  agenda for COP-3 focused on the completion of work of the Berlin  Mandate and its adoption. In the draft conclusions, the SBI  decides that: COP-3 will be held from 1-10 December 1997; after  addressing organizational matters, COP-3 will immediately  allocate the completion of decisions on the Berlin Mandate  process to a sessional committee of the whole, open to all  delegations; and in order to finalize the political negotiations  on the outcome of the Berlin Mandate, a ministerial segment will  take place from 8-10 December, when the final text of a protocol  or other legal instrument will be adopted.

CHINA, supported by the CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC, INDIA, BURKINA  FASO, MALAYSIA and the G-77/CHINA, proposed stating that any new  substantive proposals must be communicated in draft form to all  Parties six months before the ministerial segment. He noted that  prior to COP-2 there were rumors that a ministerial declaration  was forthcoming, but it came as a surprise to his delegation. The  US expressed concern on changing the existing language and noted  that the SBI could not 'tie the hands' of the COP. He noted that  if a declaration should emerge from Kyoto it will be the decision  of the COP.

The Chair, supported by the US, proposed a reference to keeping  the arrangements for the conference under review by the SBI.  CHINA amended his proposal to request communication from 'six  months' to 'well in advance' of COP-3. He also stated that the  refusal of some countries to support his proposal 'left him  wondering.' MALAYSIA stated that he was caught in surprise at  COP-2 and felt an 'air of conspiracy.' ARGENTINA reminded  delegates that the SBI can provide recommendations to the COP but  cannot decide what the COP will do. He also noted that the SBI  could not preclude issues from consideration by the COP. The US,  supported by GERMANY and the UK, proposed that the SBI should  keep the arrangements of the conference under review and  recommends that any new, substantive proposals concerning these  arrangements be communicated well in advance of the start of the  conference. CHINA said this did not solve the problem of  transparency and noted that 'arrangements' and 'proposals' are  not the same thing. MALAYSIA proposed noting that all action be  'in accordance with normal UN practice.' Delegates debated the  issue at length before agreeing to language noting that any new  substantive proposals, including proposals affecting the purpose  and organization of the ministerial segment, should be  communicated to all Parties well in advance of the conference, in  accordance with UN practice. As proposed by the US, the language  was included as a sub-item under the chapeau on 'organization of  work of COP-3,' rather than as a separate paragraph.

The SBI also adopted conclusions on the calendar of meetings for  1997-1998. The SBI decided to recommend the date and venue of  COP-4 at SBI-6, after hearing potential offers to host the  conference. It called on Parties to submit offers to host COP-4  by SBI-6. The SBI also took note of the calendar of meetings for  1997 and requested the secretariat to propose at SBI-6 a calendar  of meetings for 1998-1999 based on holding two blocks of meetings  of the Convention bodies each year, with each block comprising  two weeks of meetings.

The Chair suspended the session in the evening on 28 February  1997. SBI will meet again during AGBM-6.

# AD HOC GROUP ON ARTICLE 13

Chair Patrick Széll (UK) opened the fourth session of the Ad Hoc  Group on Article 13 (AG13-4) on Tuesday, 25 February. He recalled  that at its last session, AG13 had agreed that formal conclusions  about a multilateral consultative process (MCP) were premature  but emphasized that it was possible to distinguish several areas  of convergence and divergence. Discussions at AG13-3 were  organized around themes contained in an 'elements' paper  (characteristics, functions, institutional arrangements and  procedures). Those elements would also serve as a basis for  discussion at this session (Annex II to FCCC/AG13/1996/4).  IRELAND (on behalf of the EU), UZBEKISTAN and SWITZERLAND also  made submissions (FCCC/AG13/1997/ Misc.1).

The Chair noted that ideas from AG13-3 were constructive and  clear, but said that AG13 cannot continue on a 'diet of general  statements.' The listed options need to be reduced and AG13  should move ahead. He noted that there were points of  convergence, such as the agreement that an MCP was a system for  seeking solutions to problems arising in the implementation of  the FCCC and that its characteristics should be facilitative,  cooperative, simple and transparent. The widest divergence  pertained to whether an MCP should be advisory or supervisory.  The answer will trigger several consequences for the  characteristics, institutional arrangements and procedures of an  MCP and would therefore facilitate determination of these issues.

Delegates began with general statements and questions. The Chair  noted that in view of the time remaining before COP-3, AG13 could  likely conclude its work no earlier than at COP-4 or later. The  EU called for creation of a forum for consultations or a 'help  desk' rather than a place where governments stand accused of  breaching their commitments.

CHINA warned against duplication of existing mechanisms and said  that the FCCC should not copy the non-compliance procedure under  the Montreal Protocol. UZBEKISTAN envisaged the MCP as a process  that renders consultative services to Parties and called for a  special group with wide geographic representation to address  issues of law, economics, ecology and social issues. The group  would be established by the COP, meet twice a year and make non- binding recommendations.

Delegates then considered the elements of an MCP and agreed to  first focus on questions of an MCP's function. The EU, supported  by SWITZERLAND, called for an advisory regime to assist  implementation, which would have a broad competence but not  encroach on other bodies. CHINA noted that an MCP should take  action prior to, rather than following, implementation. It should  enable and support Parties during the course of implementation.  The US, supported by JAPAN, said that including scientific and  technological expertise could lead to duplication of the SBSTA's  work. JAPAN said that there is broad agreement on an advisory  role. The Chair stated that delegates had expressed a preference  for an advisory role. He noted that no delegation had called for  a more 'intrusive' regime.

The EU noted that an MCP will not have the functions of the SBI  and SBSTA, but should not have reduced scope. It should draw on  expertise from the SBSTA and SBI, and ensure that it has access  to information and expertise. CHILE noted that Article 14 calls  for settlement of disputes through negotiations or 'any other  peaceful means,' and that an MCP could fill the latter role. The  Chair asked whether this process should be part of the formal  procedure for dispute settlements and recalled a number of  statements that had envisaged an MCP as a mechanism to prevent  disputes.

On Wednesday, 26 February, delegates resumed consideration of the  Chair's elements paper. On characteristics, the element paper  focused on defining an MCP: nature, objective, expertise,  application, and evolution. The Chair noted general agreement  among participants that an MCP's nature should be facilitative,  cooperative, transparent, simple, non-confrontational and non- judicial. CHINA called for further definitions. She said 'non- confrontational' means that the process is triggered upon Parties  own request, the concerned Parties are fully participating in the  process, and the decisions in the process are subject to consent.

Several countries, including the EU, CHILE and the RUSSIAN  FEDERATION, said the MCP's objective should be to find solutions  to problems of implementation, to provide assistance to Parties  and to prevent disputes from arising. CHINA, supported by ITALY,  the EU and FINLAND, said that promoting 'implementation' was more  appropriate than promoting 'compliance' since an MCP's function  should be advisory. On expertise, the EU, supported by CHILE,  noted an MCP should address any questions that could arise in any  discipline and members should have sufficient expertise to ask  the right questions to experts outside the group. The US,  supported by the EU, cautioned against excluding specific fields  of expertise and called for the possibility to draw on expertise  of other bodies such as the SBSTA and the SBI. CHILE, CHINA, the  EU, SWITZERLAND and SLOVENIA supported a standing body with a  stable and fixed basis.

On institutional arrangements, the Chair's elements paper focused  on: establishment, nature, mandate, size and constitution. The  Chair suggested a non-proliferation of institutions. To avoid  greater bureaucracy, CHILE suggested establishing a small body  where members would be selected for a specified time and that  could meet concurrently with other subsidiary bodies. An MCP  should also have a list of experts that could be consulted. IRAN  spoke against creating a new institution, stressed its budgetary  implications and noted the problem that additional meetings pose  for developing countries. The EU and SWITZERLAND suggested a  standing committee, which would report to the COP. It could  consist of 10-15 experts nominated by the COP. The EU proposed to  follow the principle of rotation.

CHINA, supported by the RUSSIAN FEDERATION and IRAN, stated that  substance and functions of an MCP should be discussed before its  form, and suggested that an MCP could be an ad hoc committee.  Concerning constitution, the Chair recognized general agreement  that members of an MCP body or committee should be government  representatives.

On procedures, the Chair's element paper addresses the body that  would govern the process, issues to be taken up, result or  outcome, frequency of deliberations, and establishment of the  process. The EU stated that the process should be governed by the  COP. SWITZERLAND and the EU cautioned that the COP should not be  obliged to take a decision on every MCP item. CHINA preferred  that the COP govern the process but that reports and  recommendations are sent to the COP via the SBI. The EU said that  issues could be taken up by Parties as well as by the secretariat  or other bodies. CHINA cautioned that Article 13 states an MCP  would only be available to Parties, 'on their own request'. On  the outcome of an MCP, the EU favored recommendations rather than  decisions. On the frequency of deliberations, the EU noted that  meetings should be held at least once a year. The EU and CHINA  said the COP should establish an MCP process. The Chair announced  that he would convert the points into a draft text, drawing  together all ideas presented On 26 February, the Chair distributed a bracketed draft text on  an MCP (AG13/26.02.1997). The proposal notes, inter alia, that  the COP shall establish a multilateral consultative and/or ad hoc  committee and that an MCP will provide the COP with advice on  resolving questions with regard to: implementation of the  Convention; assistance to Parties to promote the process of  implementation of the Convention; promotion of understanding of  the Convention; and prevention of disputes and/or development of  solutions. The options regarding an MCP's functions note that it  will include consideration of: any question relating to the  performance by individual Parties in the implementation of the  Convention; support; encouragement; and/or assistance.

The proposal noted that an MCP will be open-ended or consist of  10, 15 or 25 members, who are government representatives and  experts in social, economic, legal, technical, scientific and  technological and/or environmental fields. On the manner for  submitting issues, the proposal notes that an MCP will receive,  consider and report on: any submission made by one or more  Parties; references made to it by the COP, SBI and SBSTA; or  information provided by the secretariat regarding implementation  of obligations by any Party.

In discussing this proposal, the EU, supported by SLOVENIA,  proposed that an MCP could be a 'standing' group. CHINA, the EU,  ZIMBABWE, FRANCE and SWITZERLAND said the main objective should  be to provide assistance to individual Parties rather than to the  COP. The EU also proposed retaining reference to preventing  disputes from arising and finding solutions. The US said  delegates had agreed on the non-judicial nature of an MCP and  'resolving questions with regard to implementation' seemed to  contradict this point. She proposed that an MCP should 'provide  advice to Parties on facilitating and promoting implementation.'  The EU and EGYPT insisted on bracketing the US proposal.

On an MCP's functions, FRANCE wished to reserve the opportunity  for the COP to entrust tasks to an MCP and said a five-member MCP  could be feasible considering the likelihood of additional ex  officio members. In response to concerns expressed by MALAYSIA  and IRAN, the Chair suggested that MCP meetings occur in  conjunction with COP and subsidiary body meetings.

On Thursday, 27 February, the Chair presented the revised draft  text for an MCP (AG13/27.02.1997) to be adopted as an annex to  the report of the session. CHINA suggested a new paragraph  stating that an MCP's function should be 'to provide assistance  to Parties in relation to difficulties they encounter in the  course of implementation including: (1) clarification of  questions and (2) assistance to the developing countries Parties  in accordance with Article 12.7 (relating to technical and  financial support).' The EU noted that the paragraphs on  objective and on functions are overlapping and proposed a new  paragraph on an MCP's mandate, which 'repacked' the existing  elements in a different format.

The US and ITALY expressed their concern about adding the Chinese  proposal. The RUSSIAN FEDERATION opposed the Chinese proposal on  functions because it substantially changes the previous work of  AG13. The Chair described this session as only the beginning of  the process and encouraged participants to be open for new and  detailed approaches. He suggested that new proposals could be  integrated in the text in square brackets and could be considered  further at the next session. The EU agreed and welcomed the  Chinese proposal. Participants agreed to integrate the Chinese  and EU proposals into the draft text.

On Friday, 28 February, the Chair presented his draft conclusions  stating that AG13-4 reiterates that the work of the group is  conducted within the framework set by Article 13. The draft  conclusions note that the compilation in Annex II is recorded  without prejudice to any decision on the establishment of a  multilateral consultative process and that the framework  compilation for a multilateral consultative process reflects  points raised as well as areas of convergence and divergence, and  would form a basis for discussion by the group at its fifth  session. The draft conclusions invite Parties to submit any  proposals they might have on the compilation in Annex II, and  request the secretariat to issue any proposals received by 1 June  1997. The framework compilation considers an MCP's establishment,  objective, mandate, nature, size, expertise, constitution,  deliberations, governance, how issues would be taken up, outcome  and evolution. The Chair described the framework compilation as a  very accurate basis for future discussion. AG13-4 adjourned on 28  February at 5:00 pm.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

The sixth session of the Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate  (AGBM-6) will be held from 3 - 7 March 1997 at the Stadthalle Bad  Godesberg, in Bonn, Germany. The AGBM will focus on the  preparation of a protocol or other legal instrument. In  accordance with the conclusions of AGBM-5  (FCCC/AGBM/1996/11,para. 23 (b)), the main document for the  session will be the framework compilation of proposals from  Parties (FCCC/AGBM/1997/2).

The provisional agenda, as provided by the Executive Secretary,  states that the main result of the session must be agreement on a  negotiating text of the protocol or other legal instrument. The  text must be circulated in all six official UN languages by 1  June 1997.