---
title: "WORKSHOP ON LAND USE, LAND-USE CHANGE AND FORESTRY, MONDAY, 10 JULY 2000"
id: enb12138e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12138e
date: 2000-07-10
abstract: "The workshop on land use, land-use change and forestry  (LULUCF) began with opening speeches and an overview of key  issues raised in the IPCC Special Report on LULUCF.  Participants then considered afforestation, reforestation  and deforestation (ARD) under Article 3.3 of the Kyoto  Protocol in morning and afternoon sessions."
---

# OPENING PLENARY

Harald Dovland (Norway), Chair of the Subsidiary Body for  Technological and Scientific Advice (SBSTA) of the United  Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC),  opened the meeting and welcomed participants. He said the  new IPCC Special Report on LULUCF marked a watershed in  work on this issue and provided a strong scientific basis  for deciding on the various policy options available. He  noted the upcoming 1 August deadline for the submission of  country-specific data and information on proposals by Annex  I Parties for activities related to Article 3.3 (ARD) and  3.4 (additional activities) of the Kyoto Protocol. Noting  that COP-6 was rapidly approaching, he informed  participants that consultations on LULUCF had been  tentatively scheduled for the second week of October.

Antoni Tokarczuk, Minister of the Environment of Poland,  noted that this workshop was being held in response to a  request by SBSTA to analyze the IPCC Special Report in the  context of the requirements of Protocol Articles 3.3 and  3.4. He stressed the importance of wise land use and  forestry policies in addressing climate change concerns,  and outlined elements of Poland's National Sustainable  Forestry Policy, including, inter alia: conservation of  existing forest areas; promotion of natural forest  regeneration; and reduction of clear-cutting. Stating that  LULUCF is one of the most important issues addressed by the  Protocol, he urged participants to work to achieve  'concrete results' at this meeting that could support the  Protocol's entry into force in 2002.

COP-5 President Jan Szyszko (Poland) stressed the  opportunity provided by this workshop to make progress on  LULUCF. He noted the carbon storage, biodiversity, socio- economic and other benefits of sound forestry policy.

Halldor Thorgeirsson (Iceland), Co-Chair of the SBSTA  contact group on LULUCF, noted concerns expressed by a  number of Parties regarding the agenda items relating to  discussion of possible elements of decisions. He stressed  that this workshop was not a forum for negotiating  outcomes.

IPCC Chair Robert Watson highlighted key issues for  decisions, including: defining a forest, including single  or multiple thresholds of canopy cover, and aggradation and  degradation; excluding or including the harvest- regeneration cycle and the problem of accurately reflecting  changes in carbon in the atmosphere; addressing the  question of permanence; differentiating between direct and  indirect human-induced activities; identifying which pools  to monitor, including issues related to costs, the need for  precision and technical feasibility, and monitoring of  project-based activities; addressing 1990-2008 incentives  and disincentives; and determining quantitative potentials  considering accounting approaches and the definition of a  forest, including effects under a single threshold.

# PROTOCOL ARTICLE 3.3 - AFFORESTATION, REFORESTATION AND  DEFORESTATION

### PRESENTATIONS

Bernard Schlamadinger, IPCC/Joanneum  Research, Austria, provided an overview of ARD issues under  the IPCC Special Report, focusing on the harvest- regeneration cycle, aggradation/degradation and the limit  of forest-nonforest conversions. He said that, under the  IPCC definitional scenario, ARD activities are based on  transitions between forest and non-forest uses. Under the  FAO definitional scenarios, the harvest-regeneration cycle  is included and aggradation/degradation can be included,  although this requires multiple thresholds in the  definition of a forest. He demonstrated the implications of  definitional and accounting options and noted that the  accounted stock change generally would be different from  the actual stock change during a commitment period, which  would lead to artificial credits and debits. He concluded  that the IPCC definitional scenario provided the highest  consistency between reported and actual changes in stocks  in land undergoing ARD activities, noting that this  scenario is likely to result in debits in Annex I Parties  overall, and that aggradation/degradation would be easier  to cover under Article 3.4 than under Article 3.3.

Michael Gytarsky, Institute of Global Climate and Ecology,  Roshydromet and Russian Academy of Sciences, made a  presentation on definitions of ARD within the framework of  Articles 3.3 and 3.4 of the Protocol, suggesting that these  definitions be extended to include various human activities  aimed at reducing greenhouse gas emissions and increasing  sinks. He suggested considering the inclusion of fire  prevention as a human-induced activity under Article 3.4.

Klas Österberg, Principal Technical Officer, Swedish  Environmental Protection Agency, discussed Swedish carbon  budgets in relation to the Protocol. He outlined  calculations on above-ground biomass carbon and emphasized  that Article 3.3 would not benefit Sweden, as slow growth  in early rotation cannot compensate for harvested carbon,  and could instead create a significant carbon debit.

Yuji Kimura, Office of Research and Information,  Environment Agency of Japan, made a presentation on ARD  under Protocol Article 3.3. On selection of a definition  and accounting framework for Article 3.3 activities, he  stated that these should include incentives to promote  sinks activities. He highlighted incentives to promote  forest management in Annex I countries where the  harvesting-regeneration cycle is the key factor, and said  the definition and accounting framework should encourage  carbon sequestration in the harvesting-regeneration cycle.  He supported the FAO activity-based accounting method, as  it can promote appropriate harvesting and regeneration.

Yeshey Penjor, National Greenhouse Gas Project Manager,  National Environmental Commission of Bhutan, discussed  LULUCF in a national context. He defined land-use planning  as a means of supporting farmers and rural communities  dependent on natural resources to increase their standard  of living sustainably without diminishing the future  resource base.

Kazimierz Rykowski, Professor of Forestry, Polish Forest  Research Institute, highlighted the importance of  developing a set of definitions and accounting procedures,  as well as a measuring and monitoring system. Noting  difficulties in reaching agreement on the definition of a  forest, he suggested focusing instead on seeking  definitions and descriptions of ARD and 'forestry  activities.' While agreeing with the IPCC's Special Report  that afforestation and reforestation should be classified  as forestry activities, he said deforestation should not  be, as it does not take place within forest management.

### DISCUSSION

In the ensuing discussion, FRANCE, speaking on  behalf of the EU, said its position is still under  consideration. However, he highlighted the Council of  Ministers' Decision of 23 June 2000, which notes that,  inter alia: the inclusion of sinks should not undermine the  incentives for emissions reductions or biodiversity  conservation; a decision on inclusion of further activities  under Article 3.4 should not apply until after the first  commitment period, unless concerns relating to scale,  uncertainty and risks are resolved; sinks should not be  included under the CDM; and decisions should be consistent  with sustainable forest management.

The UK called for a simple, environmentally-defensible  framework for decisions and accounting approaches. WWF  addressed the issue of control of forest fires, and  questioned how a baseline could be established. On using a  Leaf Area Index as a method for measuring carbon stocks,  Robert Watson suggested that this was not a particularly  useful approach.

On the definition of a forest, FINLAND called for the use  of existing FAO definitions, which countries are already  familiar with. BOLIVIA stressed that adopting a simple,  single threshold definition of a forest would result in a  loss of accuracy, and said the approach needs improvement.  JAPAN called for the inclusion of the harvesting- regeneration cycle under Article 3.3 to provide incentives  to fully utilize sinks, especially in countries with little  opportunity for increasing forested areas. NORWAY opposed  this suggestion, stressing the need to keep accounting  simple. He supported the IPCC framework, but stressed the  need to address the problem that increases in carbon stocks  in boreal forests would generate debits under the  accounting framework.

On ARD and forests, AUSTRALIA suggested including Article  3.3 and 3.4 in a single framework, reinforced by ARD  definitions. He noted the differences between  afforestation, reforestation and deforestation,  highlighting that deforestation needs an accounting  framework that ensures that the extent of land-use change  is monitored. FAO emphasized the dynamism of forestry  definitions and acknowledged that current FAO definitions  may not fully meet the needs of carbon accounting. He said  FAO will continue revisiting the question of definitions  and will seek input and suggestions. TUVALU, on behalf of  AOSIS, suggested considering not only ecosystem accounting  but also transactional accounting. He highlighted the  varying levels of technical capability of Parties to make  accounting measurements.

On transparency, GERMANY emphasized the importance of a  transparent accounting system that allows those not  involved in the Expert Review Teams to have access to areas  of afforestation.

Several delegates addressed the issue of potential  discrimination or loopholes relating to credits and debits  due to the timing of the first commitment period and the  relevant text in the Protocol. AUSTRALIA and FINLAND  proposed that sub-rules or exclusions could be developed to  avoid any unintended consequences - such as potential  encouragement of deforestation prior to, rather than  during, the first commitment period, in order to avoid  debits. AOSIS said the implications of sub-rules would need  to be considered. He stressed that commitment periods  should run contiguously, and said policy-makers should take  a longer-term perspective that accounts for the fact that  disadvantages accrued during the first commitment period  would be likely to disappear in the second or third period,  depending on the length of the forestry rotation period.  Co-Chair Thorgeirsson said exceptions or sub-rules should  focus on the period prior to the first commitment period,  and agreed with participants' comments that commitment  periods should be contiguous.

On inclusion of non-CO2 greenhouse gases, FINLAND stressed  that not enough is known of the balances in activities  under Article 3.3 for a well-informed decision. Emphasizing  the need for simplicity, the UK and JAPAN argued against  inclusion of non-CO2 greenhouse gases. AUSTRALIA, with the  NETHERLANDS, supported including all greenhouse gases,  adding that the intent behind Article 3.3 was not to focus  solely on CO2. He highlighted the risk of unintended  effects if a comprehensive approach is not taken, citing  the case of applying fertilizers to enhance CO2 uptake and  unintentionally increasing N2O emissions. IRELAND said  including all greenhouse gases was a reasonable proposal,  while cautioning that methodological issues would need to  be resolved.

The US said activities under Article 3.4 could be used to  address limitations in activities under Article 3.3. She  said harvested wood products should be included as a  managed pool within the accounting framework. She  highlighted the idea that definitions could vary by Party,  involving a review process to ensure technical credibility  and consistency over time. On the definition of a forest,  she said the FAO definitions have not been adopted for  carbon accounting, and need to be considered more  carefully. She preferred definitions to be made at the  Party level. She questioned the role of sub-rules and  whether their purpose was to provide incentives for future  behavior or penalize and reward past behavior.

On soil carbon, AOSIS said presentations had addressed  above- ground carbon stocks, but noted that they did not  necessarily take carbon stocks below ground into  consideration. GERMANY, opposed by JAPAN, supported  inclusion of soil carbon under Article 3.3, saying it would  give incentives for sustainable management, while  cautioning against credits for carbon that has not been  genuinely accumulated. The UK said accounting procedures  should not be too detailed.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### ARTICLE 3.4

Participants will meet in morning, afternoon  and evening sessions to consider additional human-induced  activities under Protocol Article 3.4, beginning at 9:00  am.