---
title: "HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE SIXTH SESSION OF THE AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE: WEDNESDAY, 5 MARCH 1997"
id: 1243000e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/1243000e
date: 1997-03-05
abstract: "Delegates to the sixth session of the Ad Hoc Group on the  Berlin Mandate (AGBM-6) continued consideration of elements  related to strengthening commitments in Article 4.2 (a) and  (b) and focused specifically on quantified emission  limitation and reduction objectives  (QELROs) within  specified time frames. In the afternoon, AGBM convened 'non- group meetings' on advancing the implementation of existing  commitments in Article 4.1 and on institutions and  mechanisms."
---

# QELROs

Prior to consideration of QELROS, delegates heard statements  from non-governmental organizations (NGOs). CLIMATE ACTION  NETWORK, on behalf of environmental NGOs, asked delegates if  they had the political will and moral character to act in  the best interest of all the citizens of the world. She also  called for a 20% reduction in carbon emissions by 2005. The  US and EUROPEAN BUSINESS COUNCILS FOR SUSTAINABLE ENERGY  proposed as priorities: setting clear near-term targets and  timeframes; using market-based tools to account for  'external costs' of energy, which would allow each Party to  select suitable options; and reducing and eliminating  institutional barriers, such as subsidies and tax  exemptions.

The INTERNATIONAL PETROLEUM INDUSTRY ENVIRONMENTAL  CONSERVATION ASSOCIATION, on behalf of European industries,  noted that the years 2005 and 2010 are impracticably close  deadlines. He said developing countries are expected to  generate two-thirds of global greenhouse gas emissions by  2025 and urged delegates to secure worldwide agreement. The  AMERICAN FEDERATION OF LABOR-CONGRESS OF INDUSTRIAL  ORGANIZATIONS, on behalf of labor groups, expressed concern  that 'harsh, arbitrary' flat-rate reductions in greenhouse  gas emissions are being proposed without regard to their  impact on working people. He urged delegates to remember  that they hold the power to destroy jobs and incomes of  millions.

The INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL FOR LOCAL ENVIRONMENTAL  INITIATIVES, on behalf of local governments, announced that  the World Summit for Cities for Climate Protection will meet  in Nagoya, Japan to raise awareness at the local level of  the importance of combating climate change.

Following these statements, delegates discussed aspects of  the proposals on QELROs contained in the Framework  Compilation (FCCC/AGBM/1997/2 and Add.1).

On 'guiding objectives,' the EU stated that eventual  reduction of CO2 emissions to 50% of their current levels is  required to keep global average temperature from increasing  more than two degrees above its pre-industrial level. He  recalled the recent decision of the EU Council of  Environment Ministers, which established a common position  on a reduction target for the year 2010.  His proposal  states that, in the longer term, more sophisticated methods  to allocate reduction targets shall be implemented and will   eventually lead to a convergence of emission levels based on  appropriate indicators. He could not accept IRAN's proposed  condition that QELROs for Annex I Parties must not affect  international trade or national incomes of developing  countries, particularly those exporting fossil fuels.

The EU also suggested that the US proposal regarding  establishment of long-term goals could be incorporated into  the new EU submission and should be deleted. The US  responded that this change should await a written submission  from the EU.

On 'legal character' of QELROs, the EU reiterated its  support for QELROs for significant overall reductions and  noted that P&Ms should also be legally binding. He noted  that proposals by Germany, France and the UK on legally  binding reduction objectives are already contained in the  other proposals and can be deleted. SWITZERLAND stressed  that each Annex I Party should adopt legally binding QELROs.  NIGERIA requested the deletion of a reference to the Geneva  Ministerial Declaration, which calls for legally-binding  QELROs for Annex I Parties within specified time-frames with  respect to sources and removal of sinks of greenhouse gases  not controlled by the Montreal Protocol. He emphasized that  the Declaration was not adopted and noted that the G-77/CHINA proposal to set 'realistic and achievable QELROs in  a comprehensive manner' reflects its substance. PERU  referred to the Geneva Declaration and called for reduction  target for the year 2005.

On 'coverage,' the EU proposed covering CO2, CH4 and N2O and  to add HFC, PFC and SF6 to the 'basket' of gases by 2000.  P&Ms to reduce emissions of these gases should be included  in the protocol. The US proposed merging paragraphs on Annex  I commitments based on the CO2 equivalence of their emission  contributions to the atmospheric stock of greenhouse gases  and on the exception of sources and sinks for which there is  insufficient knowledge of the GWP or inability to accurately  measure emissions or removals. HUNGARY supported the US's  long-term goal for atmospheric greenhouse gas  concentrations.

NORWAY and ICELAND withdrew their proposals, as they were  contained in other proposals. SAUDI ARABIA insisted on  references to sinks and greenhouse gases other than CO2.  CHINA said that the text should only include issues on which  agreement has been reached. JAPAN did not agree and called  for retention of its proposal that QELROs would be set for  C02 only. MARSHALL ISLANDS, on behalf of AOSIS, stressed the  need for hard targets for CO2 reductions.

On 'level and timing/emissions budgets,' the EUurged early  stabilization of greenhouse gases. He noted that sections of  the EU proposal in the Framework Compilation should be  replaced with the new EU common position. The position  states that Annex X Parties, individually or jointly, in  accordance with the Berlin Mandate, shall reduce emission  levels for CO2, CH4 and N2O together (weighted total, using  GWP, with a 100-year time horizon) by 15% by 2010 with a  reference year of 1990. An interim target for 2005 will also   be set. The EU opposed the concept of borrowing and the  consideration of emissions budgets without QELROs and  timetables. He favored flexibility regarding the base year  for countries with economies in transition.

The G-77/CHINA called for: flexibility for Annex I countries  due to their differences in starting points; no adverse  effects of P&Ms on developing countries; and no further  commitments for developing countries. CHINA called for all  other Annex I countries to propose QELROs with time frames  as the EU has done. He opposed emissions borrowing and, with  HUNGARY, opposed a new category for countries that are  rapidly developing. The RUSSIAN FEDERATION highlighted his  proposal that new commitments of Parties do not cancel,  reconsider or prolong commitments adopted by Annex I Parties  for the period before the year 2000. He supported 2010 as a  target and said that 2005 as an intermediate target seems  unrealistic. The MARSHALL ISLANDS urged for separate and  short-term targets for reducing the level for CO2 emissions.

The US stressed that the Berlin Mandate does not preclude  emissions budgets. He noted that the EU proposal does not  specify whether countries should abide by QELROs  individually or jointly. He also suggested that the EU  proposal include Table 1 of the decision by the EU Council  of Environment Ministers. The table specifies emission  reduction targets for each EU country. The EU responded that  the Council decision is not part of the EU proposal for the  protocol.

Chair Chow Kok Kee (MALAYSIA) reported on the roundtable on  differentiation. He noted a growing consensus that  indicators will be useful in negotiating QELROs. He also  acknowledged divergent views on whether or not the EU  Council of Environment Ministers' decision illustrates a  differentiation practice applicable outside the EU.

The EU requested more time to determine whether proposals  from individual EU countries could be deleted via  incorporation into the EU's new proposals. NORWAY noted that  ambitious targets via legally binding commitments can only  be achieved through efforts such as differentiation,  equitable burden sharing, comprehensive treatment of sources  and sinks, and coordination of economic instruments. He also  noted that the EU decision illustrates how differentiation  facilitates more ambitious targets. He stated that a 10 to  15% reduction for Annex I countries by the year 2010 would  be ambitious and realistic. The US restated that a  differentiated approach would not be appropriate. AUSTRALIA  insisted that its complete text on differentiation be  reproduced in the document.

On the issue of 'flexibility,' MALAYSIA, supported by CHINA,  requested deletion of the entire section on flexibility. He  said that the issue was already covered under  differentiation and QELROs. The EU noted the high  improbability of reaching agreement on a trading system in  time for COP-3. He cited disagreement on the use of  procedures for monitoring and verification and the use   trading as a substitute or delaying mechanism for domestic  action.

On 'Joint Implementation' (JI), the G77/CHINA urged the  deletion of the entire section. UZBEKISTAN called for the  retention of text noting that JI can serve as an instrument  to allow technology transfer on a more beneficial basis. The  EU said that Germany's proposal that 'a certain portion yet  to be determined may be met through JI, whereby a  significant part of the commitments must be met through  measures within each Party's own territory' should be  retained for now. SWITZERLAND supported retaining its  proposal that: JI may contribute up to 50% to meeting a  country's fulfillment of commitments; JI may begin in 2000;  JI can also take place with non-Parties to the Protocol.  PERU requested retaining JI in the text, until the review at  the end of the year.

Delegates also discussed impacts that new Annex I  commitments may have on developing countries. SAUDI ARABIA  and NIGERIA requested retaining paragraphs relating to loss  of income. The EU did not support a compensation mechanism  for financial losses of oil producing countries.

Proposals in the Framework Compilation related to  measurement, reporting and communication of information and  voluntary application of commitments by non-Annex I Parties  were accepted without amendment.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

AGBM delegates reported on the progress, or non-progress, of  the non-groups. One participant reported that the non-group  on advancing existing commitments stalled when participants  attempted to cut out anything more than simple duplications  in the proposals. Another participant stated that one group  of countries opposed even the rearrangement of its  proposals. Participants of the non-group on institutions and  mechanisms reported that the session agreed on a preamble,  definitions, and institutions and processes, but other  elements could not be finalized. Another participant said  the Chair would still conduct 'technical streamlining' of  outstanding issues.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### AGBM

Plenary will convene at 10:00 am in the Plenary I Hall  to consider agenda item 3, on strengthening commitments and  advancing existing commitments. In the afternoon, AGBM will  continue it consideration of agenda item 3.

Non-group: The non-group on institutions and mechanisms will  meet at 3:00 pm in Room A.