---
title: "FIFTH CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE, 25 OCTOBER - 5 NOVEMBER 1999"
id: enb12112e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12112e
date: 1999-11-05
abstract: "The Fifth Conference of the Parties (COP-5) to the Framework  Convention on Climate Change (FCCC) will meet from 25 October - 5  November 1999 in Bonn, Germany. Approximately 4000 participants,  including 80 - 100 ministers, are expected to attend. A high-level  segment for ministers and heads of delegation will take place from  2 - 4 November. Delegates to COP-5 will work toward fulfilling the  Buenos Aires Plan of Action (BAPA) adopted at the Fourth  Conference of the Parties (COP-4) in November 1998. Under the  BAPA, Parties set a two-year deadline for strengthening FCCC  implementation and preparing for the future entry into force of  the Kyoto Protocol. The eleventh meeting of the Subsidiary Body on  Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA-11) will consider  issues such as: guidelines for preparation of Annex I  communications; development and transfer of technologies; and land  use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF). The Subsidiary Body  for Implementation's eleventh meeting (SBI-11) will consider  issues such as non-Annex I communications, the financial mechanism  and the programme budget for 2000 - 2001. SBI and SBSTA will  jointly consider issues related to the Protocol's cooperative  mechanisms, compliance, capacity building and FCCC Articles 4.8  and 4.9 (adverse effects)."
---

# RECENT MEETINGS

### INFORMAL EXCHANGE OF VIEWS AND INFORMATION ON COMPLIANCE UNDER THE  KYOTO PROTOCOL

The informal exchange of views and information on  compliance under the Protocol was held from 6 - 7 October 1999 in  Vienna, Austria. The informal exchange was designed to facilitate  deliberations on the development of a compliance system under the  Protocol. The workshop was organized by the Austrian Government,  the FCCC Secretariat and the Co-Chairs of the Joint Working Group  on Compliance (JWG). Ninety-seven participants attended the  meeting, including experts and representatives from governments,  UN agencies, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations.  Participants heard presentations from experts and discussed  various issues related to compliance, including: compliance  regimes under the Montreal Protocol, the Convention on Long-range  Transboundary Air Pollution (LRTAP) and its protocols, the  International Labour Organization (ILO) and the World Trade  Organization (WTO); institutional issues such as facilitative and  enforcement functions, eligibility to raise issues and information  gathering; and issues related to the consequences of non- compliance. The JWG's Co-Chairs will prepare a non-paper on  elements of a compliance system based on the workshop discussions  to be presented to COP-5. The ENB report of the meeting is  available at: http://www.iisd.ca/climate/ccom1/.

### WORKSHOP ON IMPLEMENTATION OF FCCC ARTICLE 4, PARAGRAPHS 8 AND 9  (ADVERSE EFFECTS)

COP-4 agreed on the programme of work outlined  in the annex to decision 5/CP.4, including the organization of an  expert workshop. Under the guidance of SBSTA Chair Kok Kee Chow  and SBI Vice-Chair Mohammad Reza Salamat, this workshop was held  from 21 - 24 September 1999 in Bonn. The subsidiary bodies will  consider the outcome of the workshop and prepare a report  including conclusions and/or a draft decision for COP-5,  identifying initial actions to address the implementation of FCCC  Articles 4.8 and 4.9 and Kyoto Protocol Articles 2.3 and 3.14  (adverse effects). The workshop included expert presentations  followed by panel discussions addressing the policy-related  implications of the information presented.

Regarding preliminary actions, some participants suggested that  the policies and measures reported by Annex I Parties and the  projected actions to implement the Protocol be examined to analyze  potential impacts on the economies of the oil producing and other  developing countries. In this context, it was suggested that the  subsidiary bodies continue to examine information needed to  minimize the adverse social, environmental and economic impacts of  Annex I Parties' response measures on developing countries,  including: tax restructuring to reflect the carbon content of  fuels; measures to discourage the production of fossil fuels and  nuclear energy; compensation; and assistance to developing  countries, including increasing investment, to help them diversify  their economies. Other participants said the uncertainties  associated with the impact of implementing response measures are  such that consideration of specific actions is premature. They  noted that such actions under the Protocol would be considered at  the COP serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Protocol at  its first session (COP/MOP-1). They also recalled that  compensation was not provided for under the FCCC or the Protocol.  Some participants stressed the need to identify and analyze  initial actions to meet the specific needs and concerns of  developing countries arising from the adverse effects of climate  change and the impact of response measures, including information  on the possible use of insurance and other appropriate mechanisms.  For more information contact: the FCCC Secretariat: e-mail;  secretariat@unfccc.de.

### INFORMAL MINISTERIAL CONSULTATIONS

Informal ministerial  consultations were held in Warsaw, Poland on 20 September 1999.  Participants considered three questions: what needs to be  accomplished at COP-6; what ministers should do at COP-5 to set  the stage for a successful COP-6; and how Parties should proceed  from COP-5 to COP-6. Participants supported maintaining or  increasing the momentum of the negotiations through the next year.  Many participants said a package was needed at COP-6 that would  encourage ratification. A number of participants noted that if  certain Parties do not ratify the Protocol, it would not come into  effect. Participants generally agreed on the need for a balanced  outcome, with resolution of both FCCC and Protocol issues. Some  participants listed the cooperative mechanisms, compliance, sinks,  and participation of a broader number of countries under the  Protocol as key issues that need to be resolved.

Given the number and complexity of the outstanding issues, a  number of participants preferred to hold COP-6 in early 2001. Some  also noted that this would allow the COP to consider the IPCC  Third Assessment Report. However, others expressed a preference  for COP-6 to be held in the fall of 2000. COP-5 must decide on the  date of COP-6.

A number of participants sought parallel progress on those key  issues. Some called for flexibility and urged Parties not to set  pre-conditions for agreement. A few participants urged Parties to  focus on the BAPA rather than introduce new issues.

Most participants acknowledged that areas of significant  disagreement remained, but urged Parties to set aside as many of  them as possible at COP-5 to permit progress on areas of  convergence. They called for the development of negotiating text  at COP-5 in areas such as national communications by both Annex I  and non-Annex I Parties, the mechanisms, AIJ, and compliance. Many  participants also urged continued constructive progress on  capacity building and technology transfer. Ministers noted the  need for the COP-5 high-level segment to provide political  direction to the negotiations. They also called for additional  high-level consultations to periodically assess progress and  resolve outstanding issues. Such consultations could be held in  the Spring of 2000 in New York during the Eighth Session of the  Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD). For more information  contact: the FCCC Secretariat: e-mail; secretariat@unfccc.de.

### WORKSHOP ON EMISSION FACTORS AND ACTIVITY DATA FOR THE IMPROVEMENT  OF GREENHOUSE GAS (GHG) INVENTORIES

The FCCC Secretariat convened  the second Workshop on Emission Factors and Activity Data for the  Improvement of GHG Inventories from 6 - 8 August 1999 in Accra,  Ghana, to provide a forum for the exchange of experiences in the  development of emission factors and activity data for the  estimation of inventories. Fifty participants from 26 countries  attended this workshop, including representatives from national  teams and international agencies who are experts in GHG  inventories, especially in the energy and LULUCF sectors. The  objectives of the workshop were: to continue a process that  identifies strategies to improve the quality of emission factors  and activity data for GHG inventories; to address related problems  and gaps, with a view to improving the accuracy, consistency and  comparability of GHG inventories; to prioritize immediate and  longer term needs, including national, regional and global  capacity-building; and to propose and prioritize a list of project  concepts on the improvement of emission factors and activity data  in the energy and LULUCF sectors at the national, regional and  global levels. Two working groups, one on the LULUCF, the other on  the energy sector, reassessed and confirmed the related key  sectoral issues identified at an earlier workshop held in Cuba. On  this basis, 20 project concepts were proposed, aimed at improving  the quality of national and regional emission factors and activity  data. Two of the five project concepts proposed by the LULUCF  sector working group, and eight of the 15 project concepts  proposed by the energy sector working group, were ranked as high  priority. For more information contact: the FCCC Secretariat: e- mail; secretariat@unfccc.de.

### AOSIS WORKSHOP ON CLIMATE CHANGE AND THE CLEAN DEVELOPMENT  MECHANISM OF THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

The Alliance of Small Island  States (AOSIS) Workshop on the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM)  of the Protocol took place in Majuro, Republic of the Marshall  Islands from 14 - 16 July 1999. The Workshop was organized and  hosted by AOSIS and the Government of the Republic of the Marshall  Islands. Over 50 participants attended, including country  representatives from small island states, experts from various UN  and regional organizations, an environmental NGO representative  and special invitees from the Philippines, Mauritania, the US, the  UK, Australia, Norway, New Zealand and Switzerland. Participants  discussed elements of the CDM, including assessment of  vulnerability and adaptation, use of renewable energy in the  design of mitigation projects under the CDM, and capacity building  for AOSIS member states.

Participants adopted the Majuro Statement on Climate Change, which  will be brought to the attention of COP-5. The Statement  highlights domestic action in achieving Protocol commitments;  notes the need for the CDM to be a credible and viable mechanism;  stresses the need for special capacity-building initiatives in the  least developed states and small island developing states (SIDS);  underscores the importance of vulnerability assessment and  adaptation for AOSIS members; and resolves to work together to  coordinate donor activities and domestic priorities to more  effectively address SIDS' capacity building and adaptation needs.  The complete Sustainable Developments report can be found at:  http://www.iisd.ca/crs/aosis/.

### RENEWABLE ENERGY FOR THE DEVELOPING WORLD

This workshop met from  28 June - 2 July 1999 in Carbondale, Colorado, US. Organized by  Solar Energy International, the workshop explored different  applications for renewable energy technologies in developing  countries. Participants discussed how to successfully accomplish  sustainable development projects with renewable energy. Methods  for effective technology transfer, establishing infrastructure and  the economics and financing of renewable energy projects, were  presented. Participants heard case studies on solar cooking, rural  household electrification, rural health care and micro-enterprises  using renewable energy. For more information contact: Solar Energy  International: tel: +1-970-963-8855; fax: +1-970-963-8866; e-mail:  sei@solarenergy.org; Internet:  http://www.solarenergy.org/solarck.html.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### PLENARY

The COP-5 opening Plenary is scheduled to begin at 10:00  am in the Maritim Room.

### SBI

SBI is scheduled to begin at 3:00 pm.

### SBSTA

SBSTA is scheduled to begin at 4:00 pm.

To unsubscribe please email kcooney@iisd.org