---
title: "HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE THIRD CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE UNITED NATIONS FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE, 5 DECEMBER 1997"
id: enb1272e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1272e
date: 1997-12-05
abstract: "The Committee of the Whole (COW) of the Third Conference of  the Parties (COP-3) to the UN Framework Convention on  Climate Change (FCCC) continued its 'stock-taking' Plenary  in the morning. In the afternoon, the COP met in Plenary  and discussed outstanding organizational and procedural  issues. The COW's 'stock-taking' Plenary reconvened in the  evening."
---

# COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE (COW)

On Article 4 (the EU 'bubble'), NORWAY reported  consultations had made progress by clarification and  concession from the EU and the proposal would be amended.  He said important issues are still outstanding. On Article  10 (voluntary commitments), MEXICO reported that delegates  had expressed an interest in cooperating on the issue, but  there were no indications that all regional groups are  interested in contact group discussions.

Delegates considered a draft decision on methodological  issues related to a protocol, under which the COP would  reaffirm that Parties should use the Revised 1996 IPCC  guidelines for GHG inventories.

In a bracketed paragraph, the COP would also reaffirm that  global warming potential (GWPs) used by Parties should be  those provided by the IPCC based on the effects of the GHGs  over a 100-year time horizon. For information only, Parties  may use another time horizon. CHINA proposed that GWP  should take into account the inherent and complicated  uncertainties involved in GWP estimation.

SWITZERLAND, supported by HUNGARY, urged SBSTA to further  elaborate on the inclusion of bunker fuel emissions in  overall GHG inventories.

JAPAN, opposed by the UK, said there were 'actual' and  'potential' methods of estimating emissions and proposed a  new paragraph under which the COP would affirm the 'actual'  method for including HFC, PFC and SF6 emissions in QELROs.  The US, supported by NORWAY, called for using actual  methodology where data is available. Consultations will  continue on this draft decision.

Chair Mahmoud Ould El-Ghaouth reported that the negotiating  group on policies and measures (P&Ms) had produced a draft  document, although divergence of views persisted on whether  P&Ms should be compulsory or not. The draft text contains  three paragraphs. The first lists a number of policies and  measures and includes bracketed references to: certain  kinds of P&Ms; voluntary commitments by non-Annex I  Parties; implementation in accordance with national  circumstances; and assessment of P&Ms' application by the  MOP. Bracketed paragraph 2 refers to whether Annex I  Parties 'shall implement' or 'strive to implement' P&Ms in  ways to minimize the adverse effects of climate change and  adverse effects of P&Ms on other Parties. Bracketed  paragraph 3 addresses the coordination of P&Ms.

On QELROs, Chair Raúl Estrada Oyuela recalled that  emissions trading and joint implementation (JI) had not  been discussed by the COW. CANADA underscored the  importance of national circumstances and highlighted it's  development of renewable energy sources.

The Chair of the working group on I&Ms, Takao Shibata  (Japan), reported progress in discussions on Articles on  the MOP/COP, compliance mechanisms, and entry into force.  Patrick Szell (UK) is continuing work in a contact group.  He said the resolution of some issues would depend on  negotiations in other areas. Parties have requested: a  reference to Article 4.1 of the FCCC in the Preamble; that  negotiators revisit Article 14 on the MOP after discussion  on relevant sections of the text; and the inclusion of a  reference to the proposed clean development fund in Article  18. He said Parties have agreed that the FCCC COP shall  serve as the meeting of the parties to the protocol, having  agreed the principle of functional integration but legal  distinction between the bodies. Negotiations are continuing  on whether to adopt new rules of procedure. On the  compliance mechanism, the Parties are considering whether:  to adopt binding penalties; the nature of such penalties;  and whether the mechanism should extend to all Parties.

Bo Kjellén, (Sweden), Chair of the working group on  Articles 12 and 13 on commitments and finance, reported  continuing discussion on a reference to FCCC Article 4.1  and a number of sub-paragraphs.

Estrada said some delegations were seemingly unwilling to  compromise on other matters until negotiations on QELROs  were completed. Parties delaying agreement need to be aware  of their responsibility in the whole process.

In the evening, IRAN reported on consultations regarding  the proposed compensation fund.

# CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES

The COP Plenary convened in the afternoon. Delegates  accepted an offer by ARGENTINA to host COP-4 and subsidiary  body meetings, 2-13 November 1998, in Buenos Aires. COW  Chair Estrada (Argentina) reported on the Committee's work.  The COW met eight times for final negotiations on a  protocol or other legal instrument. On Article 3, Estrada  noted that negotiations on other points are awaiting  agreement on a QELROs figure. Two alternatives regarding  coverage are being discussed: immediate regulation of six  gases versus regulation of three gases now and adoption of  an annex regulating the other three at COP-4. On sinks,  Antonio la Viña (Philippines) undertook  consultations on a  definition. Agreements must be reached on sinks and  coverage before QELROs can be defined. Discussion continues  on multiple- versus single-year objectives and their  timeframe. Text on 'borrowing' emissions credits was  deleted. A compensation fund and a clean development fund  were discussed informally. Decisions were taken on  paragraphs referring to countries with economies in  transition. Discussions continue on the EU 'bubble.'  Decisions were taken on methodologies and commitments.

Other subjects still under discussion include: voluntary  commitments; joint compliance; I&Ms; and a protocol body.  Application of Article 18 and penalties for non-compliance  must also be decided. A definition of GHG quantities is  needed for Article 2. Lack of agreement on Articles 2 and 3  hinders negotiation of Article 12. On P&Ms there are three  positions favoring, respectively: obligatory P&Ms; no P&Ms;  and some non-obligatory P&Ms.

On Review of information and possible decisions under  Article 4.2(f), Pres. Oki (Japan) noted informal  consultations on amendments to the Convention and its  Annexes. Luis Herrera (Venezuela) reported consensus on  replacing Czechoslovakia in Annex I with Slovakia and the  Czech Republic and adding Croatia and Slovenia. He  submitted a draft decision (FCCC/CP/1997/L.3), which was  adopted. On deletion of Turkey from Annexes I and II,  Herrera reported continuing consultations.

Sergio Selaya Bonilla (Honduras) reported no consensus on a  proposed EU amendment for majority voting. It was  withdrawn. Bakary Kante (Senegal) reported no consensus on  Kuwait's proposal for a compensation fund. The President  reported continuing consultations on rules of procedure.

The President requested that the COP take note of several  documents: activities related to technical and financial  support (FCCC/CP/1997/INF.3); a report on the second  meeting of AGBM-8 (FCCC/AGBM/1997/8/Add.1); and  administrative and financial matters (FCCC/CP/1997/INF.1)  including the 1998-99 biennial programme budget.

Parties agreed that Brazil's proposal to relate Parties'  emissions targets to their contributions to climate change  (FCCC/AGBM/1997/MISC.1/Add.3) be given to SBSTA to review  scientific and methodological aspects, and to advise COP-4  on future activities. BRAZIL noted the proposal's political  element: that future objectives be established in terms of  global mean surface temperature change, as a mechanism for  apportioning the burden.

NEW ZEALAND said Annex I Parties' constituencies need  assurances that developing countries will adopt binding  emissions limitation commitments in a third commitment  period. He proposed double conditionality: Annex I Parties  need early agreement by non-Annex I countries on future  commitments, but non-Annex I Parties would not be held to  commitments if Annex I Parties do not fulfil their Kyoto  commitments. He called for 'progressive engagement'  according to relative levels of development, and exemption  for least developed countries. Supported by HUNGARY, the  US, CANADA, the EU, POLAND, SLOVENIA, AUSTRALIA,   SWITZERLAND, and JAPAN, he introduced a draft text that,  inter alia: notes Annex I Party commitments through 2014;  considers that future Annex I commitments beyond that date  should comprise the widest possible participation in  binding action; recognizes the dependence of inception of  non-Annex I Parties' legally binding emissions limitations  commitments on Annex I Parties' implementation,  particularly of Kyoto Protocol QELROs; agrees there should  be further QELROs for Annex I Parties and 'quantified  emission limitation objectives' for other Parties, except  least developed countries; and establishes a process to set  the commitments, to be concluded by 2002.

The G-77/CHINA, supported by THAILAND, SAUDI ARABIA, IRAN,  COLOMBIA, MALAYSIA, NICARAGUA, HONDURAS, SYRIA, GHANA,  TOGO, LAOS, KUWAIT, GRENADA, BOTSWANA, BAHRAIN, MALI,  CHILE, PERU, TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO, NIGERIA, BANGLADESH,  KENYA, MOROCCO, ZIMBABWE, INDONESIA, URUGUAY, CENTRAL  AFRICAN REPUBLIC, PHILIPPINES, VENEZUELA, COSTA RICA,  GAMBIA, ARGENTINA, and SOUTH AFRICA on behalf of Southern  African Development Community (SADC), said equity and  common but differentiated responsibility are keys to  success. He noted the low per capita emissions of  developing countries and their economic and social  development priorities. This is not the time to address  developing country commitments, but to strengthen developed  country commitments. He concluded with one word: 'no.'  INDIA objected to depriving developing countries of  equitable environmental room to grow. BRAZIL said one  developed country statement had implied 'if you don't  deliver, we won't deliver,' to which he replied 'until you  deliver, we don't discuss.' CHINA recalled the performance  of Annex I Parties in meeting existing commitments and  warned the EU: 'beware of your bubble.' HUNGARY said other Parties could follow countries with  economies in transition, who joined Annex I in spite of  economic difficulties. The US stated that commitments for  all Parties must allow for economic growth while  simultaneously protecting the environment. The US wants  developing countries, except least developed countries, to  adopt emissions targets that seek to abate the increase in  their emissions. He noted that developing country  commitments could be differentiated in light of respective  responsibilities and capabilities. The EU reiterated that  the Berlin Mandate precludes new developing countries  commitments and underscored that developed countries must  lead by adopting legally binding commitments in Kyoto. He  said it would be appropriate to start a review process  based on Article 7.2 with a view to establishing further  commitments for all Parties. While acknowledging efforts by  developing countries to address their emissions, JAPAN  pointed to the need for further participation in the  future. He proposed initiating a post-Kyoto process to this  effect. He said that developing country participation does  not mean reduction, but limitation of emissions and  indicated that New Zealand's proposal could serve as a  basis for discussions. CANADA said that the sequencing of  commitments had worked under other agreements.

The G-77/CHINA said the New Zealand proposal should be  dropped and that the group would not participate in a  contact group as a matter of principle. The President said  he would consult the Bureau.

The Executive Secretary reported on the results of his  request for information on Yugoslavia's status within the  UN and the FCCC. The President asked Yugoslavia to continue  to refrain from participation in the meeting.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

During and after the marathon of reactions in Plenary  Friday, delegates and observers pondered possible strategic  implications of the New Zealand proposal on new developing  country commitments. Some felt the proposal needed to be  aired, sooner rather than later. Others saw the proposal as  disruptive, provoking tension and resistance avoidable at  this delicate stage. Still others wondered whether the  proposal might have been placed to cast discussion of  voluntary non-Annex I commitments in a comparatively  favorable light. An authoritative observer suggested that  the presentation's greatest problem might have been in  contradicting its own sequential premise: that a clear  picture of Annex I QELROs must emerge before a sober  consideration of developing country commitments.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR ON MONDAY

## High-Level Segment

The High-Level Segment will begin at  10:00 am in the Main Hall.