---
title: "UNFCCC SEMINAR ON THE DEVELOPMENT AND TRANSFER OF ENVIRONMENTALLY SOUND TECHNOLOGIES FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE: 14-16 JUNE 2005"
id: enb12271e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12271e
date: 2005-06-16
abstract: "The UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) seminar on  the development and transfer of environmentally sound technologies  for adaptation to climate change convened from 14-16 June 2005, at  the Hilton Hotel in Tobago, Trinidad and Tobago. The seminar was  convened following a request from the UNFCCC's Subsidiary Body for  Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) at its twentieth  session in June 2004, for the UNFCCC Secretariat to organize a  seminar on the development and transfer of environmentally sound  technologies (ESTs) for adaptation to climate change, in order to  discuss case studies encompassing short-, medium- and long-term  examples of their application. The terms of reference for the  seminar were prepared by the UNFCCC's Expert Group on Technology  Transfer (EGTT) at its sixth meeting."
---

The seminar provided an opportunity for different experts to  exchange views and experiences on a range of activities relating  to ESTs for adaptation to climate change. Topics addressed  included concepts, needs for, and identification and evaluation  of, technologies for adaptation, experiences and lessons learned  and possible next steps in developing, transferring and applying  these technologies.

Fifty representatives of governments, intergovernmental and  non-governmental organizations (NGOs), business and industry  groups, and academic institutions attended the workshop. Plenary  sessions on Tuesday, 14 June, and Wednesday, 15 June, provided an  overview of the issue of development and transfer of ESTs for  adaptation to climate change, explored on-going activities and  possible synergies, and identified endogenous technologies for  adaptation to climate change. On Wednesday afternoon and on  Thursday, 16 June, participants convened in two parallel working  groups to discuss technologies for adaptation in the context of  the UNFCCC. The meeting concluded with a roundtable debate on  ways forward.

Following the seminar's conclusion, a meeting of the EGTT was held  to consider the seminar's outcome and prepare recommendations to  SBSTA.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE UNFCCC AND TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER AND  ADAPTATION

Climate change is considered to be one of the most serious threats  to sustainable development, with adverse impacts expected on the  environment, human health, food security, economic activity,  natural resources, and physical infrastructure. Global climate  varies naturally but scientists agree that rising concentrations  of anthropogenically produced greenhouse gases in the Earth's  atmosphere are leading to changes in the climate. According to the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the effects of  climate change have already been observed, and scientific findings  indicate that precautionary and prompt action is necessary.

The international political response to climate change began with  the adoption of the UNFCCC in 1992. The UNFCCC sets out a  framework for action aimed at stabilizing atmospheric  concentrations of greenhouse gases in order to avoid 'dangerous  anthropogenic interference' with the climate system. Controlled  gases include methane, nitrous oxide and, in particular, carbon  dioxide. The UNFCCC entered into force on 21 March 1994, and now  has 189 Parties.

### TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER

Technology transfer is considered a key  element in combating climate change under the UNFCCC. Technology  transfer activities have been on the agenda of every session of  the SBSTA and the Conference of the Parties (COP) to the UNFCCC.  UNFCCC Article 4.5, which addresses the need for technology  transfer, states that 'developed country Partiesshall take all  practicable steps to promote, facilitate and finance, as  appropriate, the transfer of, or access to, environmentally sound  technologies and know-how to other Parties, particularly  developing country Parties, to enable them to implement the  provisions of the Convention,' adding that 'in this process, the  developed country Parties shall support the development and  enhancement of endogenous capacities and technologies of  developing country Parties.' At COP 7, held in November 2001 in Marrakesh, Morocco, Parties  decided to establish an Expert Group on Technology Transfer (EGTT)  to support the work of the SBSTA in advancing the Convention's  technology-related goals. Since 2002, the EGTT has met several  times, adopting work programmes and providing input and advice to  the SBSTA on technology transfer. During that time, the EGTT  considered a variety of issues, focusing in particular on  information dissemination, enabling environments for the transfer  of environmentally-sound technologies, and technology needs  assessments.

### ADAPTATION

Adaptation is a cross-cutting theme of the UNFCCC and  is referred to in different articles. In particular, Convention  Article 4.1 states that Parties shall 'formulate, implement,  publish and regularly update national and, where appropriate,  regional programmes containing measures to facilitate adequate  adaptation to climate change,' and 'cooperate in preparing for  adaptation to the impacts of climate change.' Convention Article  4.4 states that developed country Parties shall 'assist the  developing country Parties that are particularly vulnerable to the  adverse effects of climate change in meeting costs of adaptation  to those adverse effects.' While COP 1 in 1995 addressed funding  for adaptation (decision 11/CP.1), it was not until the adoption  of the Marrakesh Accords in 2001 that adaptation began to be more  widely seen as a prominent area for action, as set out in decision  5/CP.7 (adverse effects of climate change). Among other things,  the decision specifically highlights the need to support the  promotion of transfer of adaptation technologies.

With decision 1/CP.10 (Buenos Aires Programme of Work on Adaptation  and Response Measures), Parties reached a new milestone in terms of  work on adaptation. The decision initiated a programme of work on  adaptation (PWA), emphasizing technology transfer for adaptation on  an urgent basis in priority sectors, and instructing SBSTA to  develop a structured five-year programme of work encompassing a  range of technology transfer issues. Work on this programme was  initiated at SBSTA 22 in Bonn in May 2005. After an in-session  workshop, numerous informal consultations and six contact group  meetings, delegates at SBSTA 22 agreed to conclusions, which  include a draft COP decision and draft annex on the SBSTA  programme. However, SBSTA 22 did not finalize the programme, and  the draft decision and annex remain bracketed. The work programme  will be further considered by SBSTA 23 in November/December 2005.

# REPORT OF THE SEMINAR

Earl Nesbitt, Trinidad and Tobago's Minister of Public Utilities  and the Environment, opened the meeting on Tuesday, 14 June, and  chaired the morning session. He drew attention to climate change  and ESTs for adaptation in the context of sustainable development.

EGTT Chair Kishan Kumarsingh (Trinidad and Tobago) outlined the  development of UNFCCC work on technology transfer and adaptation.  He noted that identifying and implementing technologies for  adaptation will involve methodologies such as vulnerability  assessment and technical needs assessment (TNAs).

SBSTA Chair Abdullatif Salem Benrageb (Libya) emphasized the  importance of adaptation and technologies for adaptation, in  addition to the need for immediate action to mitigate climate  change. He said that the seminar's outcome will be considered by  the EGTT and reviewed by SBSTA. He hoped the seminar would  generate practical ideas that the EGTT could take up in its  programme of work, including identifying next steps in developing,  transferring, and applying technologies.

Janos Pasztor, UNFCCC Secretariat, said adaptation has always been  a priority for developing countries. He said the seminar  represents the first time a group is undertaking substantive work  on adaptation. Pasztor said the EGTT would follow up on the  meeting by producing technical papers and practical information,  as well as selecting key ideas and turning them into concrete  recommendations for the SBSTA and the COP.

Orville London, Chief Secretary of the Tobago House of Assembly,  recognized the critical importance of the seminar in assisting  decision makers in fostering sustainable development. Underlining  Trinidad and Tobago's vulnerability to floods and hurricanes, he  stressed that his country and region have finally concluded that  actions must be taken to mitigate climate change and to cope with  disasters. He highlighted the need to enhance the synergies  between financial resources and technical expertise in order to  address climate change. He urged participants to reach  recommendations for policy-making processes especially regarding  floods, water resources and agricultural activities, and said the  success of this seminar will depend on developing ways to  disseminate its outcomes among as many decision makers as possible.

Penelope Beckles, Trinidad and Tobago's Minister of Public  Utilities and the Environment, stressed that small island  developing States (SIDS) have already been suffering the negative  impacts of climate change due to their geographical location, lack  of technical and financial resources, and the vulnerability of  their biodiversity to climate change. She expressed hope that the  experiences shared in the seminar would further prepare  participants to cope with disasters and adapt to climate change.  Beckles noted climate changes that impose serious challenges in  achieving sustainable development objectives are being detected in  Tobago, such as: changes in the duration of seasons; loss of  agricultural land; and changes in water availability. Noting the  need to increase the research on technology for adaptation,  Beckles highlighted the importance of promoting technology  transfer within the UNFCCC process. She welcomed activities on the  ground that transfer technology to developing countries. Beckles  acknowledged the importance of partnerships to promote sustainable  development in SIDS, and noted some activities carried out by her  country to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions, including:  increasing forest cover; using alternative fuel and new technology  with lower greenhouse gas emissions; and moving towards cleaner  production technology and energy efficiency practices.

# SETTING THE SCENE

Following the seminar's opening on Tuesday morning, participants  heard overview presentations and discussed expectations for the  seminar. The session was chaired by Kishan Kumarsingh.

### BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT

Wanna Tanunchaiwatana, UNFCCC Secretariat,  presented the background and context for the seminar. She noted  that adaptation is a cross-cutting activity under the UNFCCC, and  is being addressed by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI)  as well as by SBSTA. She noted that COP 10 requested SBSTA to  develop a five-year structured programme of work on scientific and  technical and socioeconomic aspects of the impacts of, and  vulnerability and adaptation to, climate change (referred to as  the PWA). She asked delegates to consider: what practical next  steps would be to promote the development and transfer of ESTs for  adaptation to climate change; what possible contributions this  seminar could make for the development of the PWA; how the PWA  could support the work of the EGTT; and what the seminar's key  message to the SBSTA should be.

Florin Vladu, UNFCCC Secretariat, gave an overview of technologies  for adaptation to climate change in the UNFCCC process. He said  that defining adaptation technologies in the context of climate  change is difficult, and suggested that an operational definition  might be 'the application of technology in order to reduce the  vulnerability, or enhance the resilience, of a natural or human  system to the impacts of climate change.' Vladu noted that  technological approaches to adaptation include both 'hard'  technologies such as capital goods and hardware, as well as  'soft' technologies such as knowledge of methods and techniques,  which enable 'hard' technologies to be applied. Stressing that  the benefits might be too far in the future and local  uncertainties too numerous to justify large investments solely  for climate change, he suggested that investments should begin  with present-day needs that are further justified by  consideration of climate change.

Richard Klein, Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research,  Germany, and UNFCCC consultant, presented the seminar background  paper on applications of ESTs for adaptation to climate change. He  noted that the paper provides an overview of concepts, challenges,  experiences and lessons learned in developing, transferring and  applying ESTs for adaptation. He highlighted some issues outlined  in the draft paper, including: concepts and definitions of  adaptation to climate change; implications for developing and  transferring technology; and policy issues. Klein noted that  adaptation measures include: increasing robustness of  infrastructural designs and long-term investments; increasing  flexibility of vulnerable managed systems; enhancing adaptability  of vulnerable natural systems; reversing trends that increase  vulnerability; and improving societal awareness and preparedness.  Klein stressed the importance of adaptation, noting that: climate  change cannot be totally avoided; anticipatory adaptation  (adjustments prior to the manifestation of impacts based on the  expectation of changes) is more effective and less costly than  emergency measures; climate change may be more rapid and  pronounced than currently suggested; and immediate benefits can be  gained from better adaptation to climate variability and extreme  events. He highlighted that adaptation processes should include:  raising awareness; planning design, policy criteria and  development objectives; implementing activities; and monitoring  outcomes. Klein underscored some factors that determine adaptive  capacity of human systems, including the level of economic wealth,  access to technology, information, knowledge and skills, and  existence of institutions, infrastructure and social capital.

### SEMINAR EXPECTATIONS

A number of participants presented comments  and inputs regarding seminar expectations. Canada stressed the  importance of institutional changes for successful implementation  of adaptation technologies. She hoped for a wide discussion on  technology and adaptation measures, impacts that technology  changes may have in communities, and successful applications of  adaptation technologies. Barbados expected participants to discuss  the importance of financial resources for transferring adaptation  technology and ways to strengthen institutions and promote  cooperation among developing countries. Ghana said its  expectations focused on identifying technologies that can promote  climate change mitigation and adaptation activities. Japan urged  discussion on improving TNAs, exchanging and disseminating  information on existing technologies for adaptation measures, and  mainstreaming adaptation and sustainable development policies at  national levels. Noting that his country faces numerous challenges  for adaptation to climate change, China highlighted the need for  coordinating the design and implementation of measures to promote  technology transfer, which could include defining concepts,  raising information awareness, enhancing early warning systems and  models, building human capacity, and identifying priorities for  adaptation.

###     Discussion

Several developing countries highlighted the need for:  focusing on the means to transfer technology from developed  countries to developing countries; providing concrete examples of  transferring adaptation technology; promoting stakeholder  participation; and defining technological needs for adaptation in  national assessments. Several developed countries underscored the  importance of: assessing practical next steps to promote  technology transfer; analyzing the means for disseminating useful  and available technology information to countries that need  technologies; exploring synergies between adaptation and  mitigation technologies; and enhancing the capacity of countries  that need technologies.

One participant underscored the need to establish ways to  communicate the implementation of adaptation measures and risk  reduction to insurance companies in order to see these actions  reflected in insurance premiums and conditions. A participant  expressed concern about ways to capture and apply indigenous  knowledge regarding adaptation measures.

# ENVIRONMENTALLY SOUND TECHNOLOGIES FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE  CHANGE

Participants heard presentations on technology needs on Tuesday  afternoon, and on identification and evaluation of technologies on  Wednesday morning. The session was chaired by Kishan Kumarsingh.

### METHODOLOGIES FOR TECHNICAL NEEDS ASSESSMENTS

Yamil Bonduki,  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), presented the UNDP  handbook for conducting TNAs and preliminary results of UNDP  analysis of TNA reports. He said the TNA handbook provides a  framework to conduct a TNA from a climate change and development  perspective. He pointed out that while TNA for mitigation is  fairly straightforward, TNA for adaptation is more complex and  challenging. He identified several issues in the identification of  technology needs for adaptation, including:emphasis on the most vulnerable sectors and areas; wide stakeholder involvement; linkages with other national priorities; identification of hard and soft technologies; the extent of sector-specific vulnerabilities or hazards; the adaptive capacities of vulnerable sectors and  populations; the risks of implementing maladaptation options; and the potential of soft technologies to build resilience.

He presented a preliminary analysis of 14 TNA reports. Noting that  most countries adopted a sectoral approach for TNAs, he outlined  criteria for prioritization of options and the share of adaptation  and mitigation options by sector. He said that lessons learned  from this process include: development is the biggest priority for  countries; capacity building and government and stakeholder  involvement are important; cross-sectoral issues should be  addressed, including linkages between mitigation and adaptation  priorities; and cost is one of the highest barriers in technology  transfer.

Mahendra Kumar, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP),  presented experiences and lessons learned from TNAs conducted by  UNEP. He presented the adaptation and mitigation technology needs  examined by sector, noting that for some sectors (e.g., energy)  almost all countries looked at both adaptation and mitigation,  while for others (e.g., coastal zones) countries looked only at  adaptation. He outlined the needed technologies, criteria for  technology selection, and barriers to adaptation identified by  TNAs for various sectors: coastal zones, energy, forestry and land  use, industry, transport, waste management, and water resources.  He said many countries identified tools, such as Geographic  Information Systems (GIS) and tide gauges, rather than  technologies, and noted the need to more clearly define adaptation  technology. He stressed the need to increase capacity, particularly  in the area of science and technology, and to strengthen linkages  to policy.

Chair Kumarsingh outlined the draft framework of the modified TNA,  which includes the need for countries to:identify and prioritize vulnerable sectors; identify specific characteristics of prioritized sectors; compile a list of response or adaptation measures that can be  implemented to address the specific vulnerability issues; elaborate a prioritized list of practicable options; identify technologies that can aid in addressing practical  options; identify applicable technologies and capacity-building needs  to use such technologies; and compile a report.

He noted that the TNA methodology regarding environmental  technology impact assessment should: examine the reason for the  proposed technology; describe the chosen technologies; carry out  alternative analysis for the chosen technologies; examine  technologies' longevity; and promote stakeholder participation.

Elmer Holt, Climate Technology Initiative (CTI), highlighted CTI  experiences in supporting TNA development. He noted that CTI aims  to foster rapid development of climate technologies and to support  the EGTT's activities. He noted that TNA is not an 'academic  exercise' and needs to be implemented. Holt said that the UNFCCC's  Technology Transfer Clearing House (TT:Clear) shows some TNA  results and provides opportunity for possible 'matchmaking'  between countries' interests regarding technology transfer. Holt  said existing TNA methodology guidelines need to be reviewed, and  implementation of TNAs must be enhanced.

###     Discussion

In the ensuing discussion, participants highlighted a  number of issues, including: the voluntary basis for submitting  TNAs to the Secretariat; the importance of national development  policies to inform the elaboration of TNAs; the synergies between  Least Developed Countries' (LDC) National Adaptation Programme of  Actions (NAPAs) and TNAs to implement climate change measures; and  TNA limitations regarding ways to identify technologies that can  be adjusted to national circumstances.

### NEEDS FOR TECHNOLOGIES

Florin Vladu presented needs for  adaptation technologies as expressed in TNAs, national  communications and other national reports, summarizing results  from the Annex I Parties' third national communications. He gave  examples of initiatives in water resources, forestry, agriculture,  human health, fisheries, and infrastructure and service sectors,  as well as projects conducted with bilateral assistance. He cited  examples of bilateral projects focused on vulnerability  assessment, disaster preparedness and risk management, integrated  water management, prevention of desertification, and support of  meteorological networks. In national communications for non-Annex  I Parties, he noted that main vulnerable sectors identified were:  agriculture and food security; water resources; coastal zones and  marine ecosystems; terrestrial ecosystems and forests; and human  health.

Virginia Sena, Uruguay's Ministry of Housing, Territorial  Regulation and Environment, outlined identification of adaptation  measures and related technologies in Uruguay's second national  communication. Sena said that Uruguay developed a programme of  general measures for mitigation and adaptation, with a main  objective to identify greenhouse gas reduction measures and  facilitate adaptation. She noted that the programme includes  vulnerability analysis, and a summary of identified adaptation  measures for agriculture, biodiversity, coastal resources, water  resources, fishery resources, and human health. Sena underscored  the programme also includes cross-sectoral measures oriented to:  institutional strengthening on climate change matters; development  of a programme on climate change information dissemination, public  awareness and education; improvement of capacity for development  and transfer of ecologically rational technologies; and promotion  of research and systematic observation.

Rasack Nayamuth, Mauritius Sugar Industry, presented summarized  vulnerability and adaptation assessments for agriculture, water  resources, coastal zone, forests and other land use, health, and  fisheries in his country. Nayamuth stressed that agriculture,  particularly sugarcane, as well as water resources were identified  as highly vulnerable sectors. Summarizing the process and  methodologies used in developing Mauritius' TNA, he noted that  difficulties included inadequate capacity, limited response from  stakeholders, and the need for resources.

Yamil Bonduki outlined the UNDP Adaptation Policy Framework (APF),  and said the APF is a flexible structured approach that treats  adaptation technologies as coherent packages of 'soft' and 'hard'  responses. He highlighted the APF project design, which involves:  assessing current vulnerability; characterizing future climate  risks; developing adaptation strategies; and continuing the  adaptation process. Bonduki said that the adaptation learning  mechanism (ALM) aims at maximizing global learning and  contributing to the incorporation of adaptation strategies into  development planning. He underscored that the UNDP/Global  Environment Facility (GEF) adaptation strategy includes four  phases, namely methodology improvement and dissemination, regional  assessments, national assessments, and implementation.

###     Discussion

Participants addressed issues, including:the limitation of technology options available; the challenges of implementing TNAs; ways to identify and prioritize technologies under the  climate change framework; the use of the APF to select adaptation projects at country  level; and ways to access funding windows within the GEF for projects  under the Convention.

One participant underscored the need to start elaborating the  national development policy before carrying out TNAs. A  participant asked if ALM includes issues regarding disaster  prevention, and Bonduki responded that it does.

# IDENTIFICATION AND EVALUATION OF TECHNOLOGIES FOR ADAPTATION TO  CLIMATE CHANGE

EGTT Vice-Chair Bernard Mazijn (Belgium) chaired the session on  Wednesday morning.

Anthony Nyong, University of Jos, Nigeria, presented results from  a vulnerability project in the West African Sahel. He said the  main vulnerabilities of the population in this region stem from  either water or agriculture issues. Noting that climate  variability, rather than climate change, is an ever-present  regional concern, he said that coping with present-day variability  would go a long way down the road towards adapting for climate  change. On adaptation, he pointed out that households have been  implementing different adaptation technologies for many years, and  that many decisions on adaptation are taken at the community level  through farm associations. Using participant-identified indicators  of success, he said that water harvesting technology is one of the  most desired technologies. Nyong concluded that local knowledge is  a major underutilized resource in adaptation, and that development  efforts should be applied with an understanding of, and  sensitivity to, local communities.

Richard Klein spoke on technology for adaptation to climate change  in coastal zones. He noted that coastal zones are among the  environments under most stress, yet offer significant  opportunities for economic development. He observed that first- order effects of climate change on coastal zones include: sea- level rise; increases in seawater temperature; increased  precipitation intensity; changes in wave climate, storm frequency,  and river runoff; and increased ecosystem productivity due to  increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide. Focusing on sea-level rise,  Klein noted that the number of impacts assessed in vulnerability  studies is very limited. He observed that even stringent  mitigation measures would have limited impacts on the number of  people at risk from floods, because of lag times in the atmosphere  and ocean systems. Klein noted the existence of several tools and  strategies for information, planning and implementation, and said  there is a need for consultation and coordination with  stakeholders in coastal zone management.

Francis Agyemang-Yeboah, School of Medical Science, Ghana, noted  the distribution and abundance of disease vector organisms and  intermediate hosts are affected by changes in both physical and  biological factors in the ecosystem. He presented a case study  from Ghana combining air temperature and humidity projections with  distribution of diseases. He concluded that periods of high  meningitis, diarrhea and malaria cases coincide with periods of  high maximum air temperature. Agyemang-Yeboah said the  socioeconomic impacts of such diseases include reduced income of  affected individuals due to loss of productivity. He suggested  some health adaptation strategies and identified technologies for  preventing and curing diseases. For malaria, Agyemang-Yeboah  suggested the development of vaccines, herbal preparations,  insecticide, impregnated nets and combined therapy. For  cerebrospinal meningitis, he suggested altered house designs,  early vaccination initiatives, mobile clinics and health  education. For cholera, he suggested the use of bole-hole drills  for capturing water, the employment of activated charcoal domestic  water filtration systems, and the establishment of locations for  disease screening and medical care. For coping with climate change  and health issues, Agyemang-Yeboah underscored the need for  socioeconomic adaptation, capacity-building initiatives,  coordinated health policies, evaluation and monitoring, strong  institutions, cost-effective technologies, and financial resources.

Ian Burton, Independent Consultant, Canada, stressed the  importance of motivating individuals to spread adaptation  technology, especially related to extreme events. He noted that  with regard to infrastructure and adaptation requirements,  developers have an apparent preference for more exposed or  dangerous locations, which can have particular economic benefits.  For coping with extreme climate events, Burton suggested: revision  of civil construction codes and standards taking into account  weather extremes; raising stakeholders' awareness of climate  change impacts; providing advice on ways to incorporate climate  change into stakeholders' decision-making processes; developing  insurance products through the private insurance industry; and  lowering insurance premiums for areas where adaptation measures  have been implemented.

Abhayasingha Bandara, Sri Lanka's Department of Meteorology,  addressed the issue of adaptation to increased thunderstorm  hazards among low-income families. Noting a variety of lightning  risks to human lives and concrete constructions, he said providing  'earth terminal' installations is necessary for avoiding accidents  and damages. Bandara stressed that in his country the practice of  building houses with aluminum roofs on mountaintops and without  earth terminals attracts lightning, causing losses of human lives  and damage to properties. He suggested that precautionary steps be  considered during construction, such as low-cost lightning rod  technologies.

###     Discussion

On water resources and agriculture in West Africa, one  participant asked whether the technologies studied were  autonomously adopted or introduced. Nyong responded that many  technologies were introduced, and that most were natural resource  management technologies introduced after the 1972 drought. In  response to a question on the role of policies, Nyong clarified  that he had assessed the impact of both national and state-level  policies on adaptation in the region.

On coastal zones, a participant noted that severe weather events  such as tropical cyclones are a significant problem.

On climate change and human health, one participant underlined the  linkages between water system storage and diseases. Another  suggested analyzing the connections between malnutrition and the  spread of diseases in the Ghana case study. Agyemang-Yeboah said  that there is need for adaptive responses for malnutrition related  to climate change, such as that caused by drought and loss of  agricultural land. One participant highlighted the need for  technology to identify and prevent the spread of diseases at an  early stage, and Agyemang-Yeboah agreed these technologies would  be useful.

On insurance, a participant raised the issue of reinsurance, and  Burton clarified that reinsurance companies are currently  addressing the question of catastrophic losses. Another  participant noted the need for public sector involvement,  particularly in areas of extreme high risk. A participant noted  that insured parties should be partners in reducing risk. Pasztor  pointed out that two workshops on insurance have been conducted  under the Convention.

Responding to a question of whether climate change is a  quantifiable risk factor, Burton clarified that though it is not  precisely quantifiable, it could be taken into account in  decision-making using expert judgment. One participant noted that  strategic partnerships with professional organizations could be  useful, and another said that focusing on property losses ignores  more significant human losses in developing countries. Burton  agreed, but noted that human losses in disasters are decreasing as  a result of better early warning and evacuation systems.

# ONGOING ACTIVITIES AND POSSIBLE SYNERGY

### FINANCING THE TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGIES FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE  CHANGE

On Wednesday morning, delegates heard presentations and  discussed opportunities for financing the transfer of technologies  for adaptation. Abdullatif Salem Benrageb chaired the session.

Daniele Violetti, UNFCCC Secretariat, presented an overview of  trends in financial flows and ongoing work on innovative financing  for the development and transfer of technology. On funding  targeted to climate change, he noted that funding is available  from: bilateral activities of Parties; multilateral activities  such as the GEF, the World Bank or regional banks; the Special  Climate Change Fund (SCCF); the LDC Fund (LDCF); financial flows  generated by Joint Implementation/Clean Development Mechanism  projects; and private sector investments. He surveyed funding  flows outside the Convention, noting the increasing role of the  private sector in funding provision. Violetti pointed out that a  workshop on innovative financing was held in Montreal from 25-27  September 2004, and summarized its conclusions in the areas of  TNAs, toolkits and handbooks, training and capacity building,  enabling environments, risk management, dialogue, the role of  financing, and adaptation. He noted that a follow-up workshop  will be organized in October 2005.

Bonizella Biagini, GEF, presented financing provisions for  adaptation technologies under the Convention. She outlined the  role of the GEF in providing financing, and gave an overview of  funds available for adaptation activities. For implementation  activities, she noted that four programmes are available: the  Strategic Priority on Adaptation (SPA) trust fund; the LDCF; the  SCCF; and the Adaptation Fund under the Kyoto Protocol. Noting  that the SPA projects are designed to 'show how adaptation  planning and assessment can be practically translated into  projects that will provide real benefits,' she summarized SPA  projects in process in Kiribati, Colombia, the Caribbean, and  Africa. She clarified that while the SPA funds the incremental  costs of projects that have global benefits, LCDF and SCCF fund  the additional cost of adaptation measures that are not required  to include global benefits. While the LCDF funds projects for  LDCs' urgent and immediate needs as identified in NAPAs, SCCF  funds projects in priority areas of intervention with a longer- term approach and strategy. She noted that the top priority area  of the SCCF is adaptation, and that its second priority area is  technology transfer.

###     Discussion

In the ensuing discussion, participants addressed  opportunities for financing the transfer of adaptation technology.  One participant asked why innovative finance is needed, and what  types of capacity building initiatives are needed for financing.  Violetti responded that the Secretariat is looking at both  innovative and conventional financing opportunities, and that  capacity-building activities are needed for Parties to understand  the functions of financing and ways to apply them. One participant  underscored the need for financial resources that could be used  for private technologies. Several participants asked how the GEF  defines and measures 'global benefits.' Biagini answered that a  full definition of 'global benefits' is available on the GEF  website, and highlighted the importance of this criterion for GEF  accountability. Another participant underscored the need to  finance initiatives on capacity building, partnerships and  information sharing.

### LESSONS LEARNED AND POSSIBLE SYNERGY WITH ONGOING ACTIVITIES

Markus Lehmann, Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD),  summarized the CBD objectives: conservation of biodiversity;  sustainable use of its components; and fair and equitable sharing  of the benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources.  He noted that CBD Parties are to provide and facilitate access to  and transfer of technologies that are relevant to the CBD  objectives. Lehmann stressed that, under the CBD, access to  genetic resources can be granted in exchange for access to, and  transfer of, technology that makes use of those genetic resources.  He stressed that transfer of technology in the CBD includes  technology protected by intellectual property rights and must be  implemented in accordance with international law. He noted the CBD  programme of work includes elements related to technology  assessments, information systems, enabling environments and  capacity building. Lehmann noted that sets of technology for both  biodiversity and climate change are difficult to define, and said  there are opportunities for sharing experiences and good practices  and cooperating to minimize trade-offs.

Ian Noble, World Bank, said the World Bank is concerned about  climate change because the poor will face the greatest challenges  from its consequences. He stressed that two billion people in  developing countries were affected by climate-related disasters in  the 1990s, and 2% of World Bank funds are diverted to disaster  relief. Noble said that while climate change is a very minor  factor in the Bank's development decision-making processes, it is  becoming more relevant to project planning, and climate  variability is already a major impediment to development. Noble  noted that funds for mitigation and adaptation under climate  change are limited and must be used effectively. He presented a  screening tool under development by the World Bank that allows  anyone to view models and find out whether a specific project will  need to take into account climate change factors.

Taka Hiraishi, UNFCCC's Consultative Group of Experts on non-Annex  I national communications (CGE), presented an overview of CGE work  relevant to vulnerability and adaptation. He summarized extracts  from national communications of non-Annex I Parties on the subject  of vulnerability and adaptation. He also highlighted results and  recommendations from a hands-on training workshop, held in Maputo,  Mozambique, from 18-22 April 2005. Hiraishi said 40 hours of  training were provided for 55 participants, during which modeling  software and tools for vulnerability and adaptation assessments  were used.

###     Discussion

One participant pointed to inconsistencies between  transfer of technology in the CBD and the Agreement on Trade- Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS). Lehmann  clarified that the relationship between CBD provisions and the  TRIPS agreement are controversial, and that no consensus exists  among Parties. He further noted that Parties are encouraged to  cooperate on these issues. One participant noted the need to  consider conflict areas when protecting biodiversity. Responding  to a question about implementation of national biodiversity action  plans prepared for the CBD, Lehmann said that implementation will  depend on each country's access to funding.

Several participants asked whether there are obligations to take  climate change issues into account when elaborating projects for  the World Bank. Noble responded that this is not the case. A  number of participants requested clarification on access to the  World Bank screening tool. Noble said the model will be freely  available on the World Bank website when completed, and offered a  prototype version to participants willing to test it.

# ENDOGENOUS TECHNOLOGIES FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE

On Wednesday afternoon, participants heard presentations on  endogenous technologies for adaptation to climate change. The  session was chaired by William Agyemang-Bonsu (Ghana).

Mozaharul Alam, Bangladesh Centre for Advanced Studies, presented  an overview of endogenous technologies for adaptation to climate  change in Bangladesh. Noting that hazards in Bangladesh include  floods, storm surges, droughts, and increasing salinity, he gave  examples of technologies existing in Bangladesh to reduce risk. On  floods and storm surges, he noted structural measures such as  multipurpose cyclone centers, and non-structural measures such as  sub-surface food and seed storage. On wetlands, he mentioned a  floating agriculture technique called baira, traditionally  practiced in southern districts but recently introduced in other  wetland areas through environment and development projects. He  enumerated coping strategies, such as polyculture, rainwater  harvesting, migration, and afforestation. He said a main lesson  was that endogenous technology for adaptation is context-specific,  and that challenges include the need to understand communities and  ecosystems and the functionality of these technologies under the  additional stress of climate change.

LDC Expert Group Chair Paul Desanker (Malawi) spoke about  adaptation technologies in NAPAs. He gave an overview of the NAPA  process, and provided examples of adaptation needs identified by  NAPAs and associated applicable technology, including improving  yields through irrigation and changes in crops or tree types. He  noted that some early examples of project results emerging from  NAPAs are: early warning systems; seasonal forecasts; agricultural  technology; GIS and Remote Sensing analysis; and integrated  modeling and planning. Desanker mentioned that the most critical  constraint is likely to be funding for technology. He said that an  online database of adaptation solutions is planned to share local  knowledge and endogenous adaptation techniques.

###     Discussion

In the ensuing discussion, one participant highlighted  the complexity of managing an integrated assessment that combines  numerous elements.

Answering a question on regional cooperation and transfer of  technology, Alam said that at the moment there is no cooperation  regarding the issue. He reiterated that endogenous technologies  are context-specific. A participant asked how to successfully  introduce endogenous technologies in other countries, and Desanker  underscored that this will depend on a continued learning process.

# WORKING GROUPS' DISCUSSION ON TECHNOLOGIES FOR ADAPTATION IN THE  CONTEXT OF THE UNFCCC

On Thursday morning, participants convened in two separate working  groups in order to facilitate discussion in smaller groups. The  groups addressed the lessons learned from the seminar, information  needs and processes, and ways forward on technologies for  adaptation, focused on five detailed questions provided by the  Secretariat. Working Group I (WG-I) was chaired by Holt and  Working Group II (WG-II) was chaired by Rawleston Moore  (Barbados). Participants' discussions in the working groups were  reported to the plenary and are to provide inputs and contribute  to the final report of the workshop.

What were the key lessons you received from this seminar? Were  your expectations met? Participants in WG-I mentioned numerous lessons learned from the  seminar, including: the importance of synergies and the value of  sharing country experiences; awareness of the tools available for  identifying technology; and the role of technologies for  adaptation in different sectors, such as water and health. Several  participants suggested general insights, such as:the need for additional outreach efforts to increase  awareness of climate change and adaptation issues; the importance of integrating adaptation into overall  development planning; the need for focused efforts to implement technologies for  adaptation; the need to disseminate the results of TNAs and NAPAs; and the importance of involving the private sector.

One participant noted that country experiences demonstrate the  importance of a bottom-up approach, while another added that  top-down approaches can also be useful. A number of participants  said that further understanding of the cross-cutting nature of  mitigation and adaptation is necessary.

In WG-II, numerous participants said their expectations were met.  A few participants highlighted the limitations of actions that can  be taken in their countries, and suggested that the next seminar  include more case studies on adaptation technologies. A participant  underscored that identifying existing technologies and adjusting  them to the country level should be considered before transferring  technology. Participants highlighted the need to: promote more  south-south cooperation and more discussion on adaptation  technologies and practices; link technologies for adaptation with  development goals; and hold further discussion on the practical  exchange of information including maladaptation issues.

Would access to information on country experiences with  technologies for adaptation be useful? If so, in what form should  this information be presented, and what support is necessary to be  able to utilize this information? While most participants in WG-I agreed that information on country  experiences would be useful, some questioned whether a guide would  be necessary. Participants noted that there is a need to make sure  information is useful, and several raised concern about whether  countries have the capacity to use this information. Participants  suggested that an additional workshop for SIDS on technology for  vulnerability and adaptation would be helpful. Participants also  suggested that information targeted to media and politicians was  important.

In WG-II, participants considered access to information vital for  transfer of technology, and suggested establishing an adaptation  chat room, network or teleconference to share information relating  to country experiences on adaptation and technologies. Some  participants highlighted that the internet is not widely available  in their regions, and underscored the need to develop other ways  to promote access to successful experiences on transfer of  technology. Another participant suggested elaborating a compendium  to be available in CD-ROM format and the internet, including  background information on the development of these technologies,  experiences in their application, and best practices. Participants  suggested having an adaptation technology fair to disseminate  information, inviting the private sector to demonstrate new  technologies to country representatives.

How might the outcomes from assessments relating to technologies  for adaptation be structured to enhance their prospects for  financing? What steps might be taken to help facilitate a  market-based supply of technologies for adaptation? WG-I participants noted the need for further work on guidance and  for support on structuring proposals, and suggested that a  standardized template would be useful. One participant noted that  it would be useful to have guidance on how to cope with climate  change as opposed to climate variability, in order to meet  Convention and financing criteria. Other suggestions raised by  participants included the need for: methodologies for measuring  success; better coordination between agencies and countries on  agendas; engaging the private sector; and using the results of  TNAs and NAPAs.

In WG-II, one participant underscored the challenge of quantifying  adaptation costs, and the need to identify such costs and  integrate them into development plans. Another suggested carrying  out a cost-benefit analysis for each project that is implemented  in order to generate data on adaptation opportunity costs. A  participant suggested inviting financing experts to participate in  the next seminar in order to identify financing prospects.  Participants also highlighted the need to: identify innovative  financing packages to facilitate the transfer of adaptation  technologies; engage the insurance industry in adaptation  discussions; and identify specific private sector stakeholders to  be involved.

What synergies within the Convention and other MEAs might be  pursued to enhance the work on technologies for adaptation? WG-I participants noted the need to take advantage of synergies,  and mentioned in particular the need to coordinate the work of the  expert groups. Participants also noted possibilities for  coordination with the GEF, CBD, the TRIPS agreement, and the  International Monetary Fund. Though some participants underscored  the need to coordinate strategies for adaptation and mitigation,  one participant noted that the two are separate issues and did not  want to see synergies in this area.

WG-II participants recognized that the ongoing cooperation and  information sharing between expert groups established under the  Convention has proven to be very useful and should continue.  Several participants also suggested inviting representatives from  other conventions, such as the UN Convention to Combat  Desertification and the CBD to take part in adaptation discussions.  A participant suggested identifying specific fields in which  synergies can be enhanced.

SBSTA is developing a five-year structured programme of work built  around the following issues: methodologies, data and modeling;  vulnerability assessments; adaptation planning, measures and  actions; and integration into sustainable development. Given these  four themes, what messages coming from this seminar would you deem  important that might be considered for inclusion in this programme  of work on adaptation? WG-I participants noted that research and development on  technologies for adaptation should be noted in the PWA. Another  noted the need for synergies between mitigation and adaptation,  while another said that coordination rather than synergies were  important. Some cautioned that the PWA should take advantage of  work done already and not develop a completely parallel process.

WG-II participants suggested: ensuring that efforts aimed at  addressing technologies for adaptation contributes to meet  sustainable development objectives; promoting awareness-raising  and information-sharing initiatives; and integrating adaptation  and mitigation activities.

# CLOSING SESSION

Moussa Sanon, Department of Management of Natural Resources,  Burkina Faso, presented a case study on transfer of technology and  capacity building for coping with climate variability. He noted  that experts focused their work on cotton and cattle ranching,  carried out guided discussions with stakeholders, and highlighted  the importance of: restoring and improving soil fertility;  increasing collection of rainwater; strengthening capacities with  field demonstrations; and improving irrigation efficiency. Sanon  said the case study launched a workshop to foster effective  stakeholder participation, information-sharing and awareness- raising. He concluded that successful technology transfer projects  need to: involve stakeholders from the beginning of a project;  elaborate inventories on techniques and constraints; apply a  variety of technologies rather than isolated ones; and strengthen  capacities.

Wanna Tanunchaiwatana said the seminar will contribute to the EGTT  task of preparing a report on adaptation for SBSTA's consideration  by the twenty-third sessions of the subsidiary bodies (SB 23).

SBSTA Chair Benrageb commended participants for their hard work  and commitment during the seminar and thanked the government of  Trinidad and Tobago and the UNFCCC Secretariat. He highlighted  that the seminar provided useful ideas for the elaboration of  SBSTA work on adaptation issues. He noted some challenges ahead,  including: defining global benefits; sharing more experiences;  exploring innovative finance to complement existing financial  mechanisms under the Convention; increasing partnerships with the  private sector; enhancing synergies with other MEAs; fostering  capacity building; and combining adaptation with mitigation  activities.

Sheriff Faizool, Deputy Permanent Secretary, Trinidad and Tobago's  Ministry of Public Utilities and the Environment, said the seminar  produced excellent results and expressed hope that participants  will be able to use such results to make changes in their own  countries regarding adaptation.

EGTT Chair Kumarsingh closed the meeting at 12:43 pm.

# UPCOMING MEETINGS

### EXTRAORDINARY MEETING OF PARTIES TO THE MONTREAL PROTOCOL/ TWENTY- FIFTH MEETING OF THE OPEN-ENDED WORKING GROUP

These meetings are  scheduled from 27 June to 1 July 2005, in Montreal, Canada. The  extraordinary meeting will seek to resolve disagreements over  exemptions allowing methyl bromide use in 2006. For more  information, contact: Ozone Secretariat; tel: +254-2-62-3850;  fax:+254-2-62-3601; e-mail: ozoneinfo@unep.org; internet:  http://www.unep.org/ozone

### 2005 ANNUAL MEETING OF THE INTERNATIONAL ENERGY WORKSHOP

This  workshop is scheduled from 5-7 July 2005, in Kyoto, Japan. Themes  to be covered include managing uncertainty and abrupt climate  change, UNFCCC/Post-Kyoto regimes and technological responses to  climate change. For more information, contact: Leo Schrattenholzer,  IIASA; tel: +43-2236-807-225; fax: +43-2236-807-488; e-mail:  leo@iiasa.ac.at; internet:  http://www.iiasa.ac.at/Research/ECS/IEW2005/index.html

### G8 GLENEAGLES 2005 SUMMIT

This meeting will convene from 6-8 July  2005, in Gleneagles, Perthshire, Scotland. For more information,  contact: British Prime Minister's Office; fax: +4420-7925-0918;  internet: http://www.g8.gov.uk/

### SOLAR WORLD CONGRESS 2005

This congress will take place from  6-12 August 2005, in Orlando, Florida, US. For more information,  contact: Becky Campbell-Howe, American Solar Energy Society; tel:  +1-303-443-3130; fax: +1-303-443-3212; e-mail: bchowe@ases.org;  internet: http://www.swc2005.org

### WORKSHOP FOR INNOVATIVE FINANCING OF DEVELOPMENT AND TRANSFER OF  TECHNOLOGIES

This UNFCCC workshop is tentatively scheduled for  October 2005. For more information, contact: UNFCCC Secretariat;  tel: +49-228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail:  secretariat@unfccc.int; internet: http://unfccc.int/

### SEVENTEENTH MEETING OF THE PARTIES TO THE MONTREAL PROTOCOL

MOP-17 is tentatively scheduled to take place 12-16 December 2005,  in Dakar, Senegal. For more information, contact: Ozone  Secretariat; tel: +254-2-62-3850; fax: +254-2-62-3601; e-mail:  ozoneinfo@unep.org; internet: http://www.unep.org/ozone

### FIRST MEETING OF PARTIES TO THE KYOTO PROTOCOL AND ELEVENTH  CONFERENCE OF PARTIES TO THE UNFCCC

Scheduled for 28 November to  9 December 2005, in Montreal, Canada, the first Meeting of Parties  to the Kyoto Protocol (MOP 1) is taking place in conjunction with  the eleventh session of the Conference of Parties (COP 11) to the  UN Framework Convention on Climate Change. For more information,  contact: UNFCCC Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815-1000; fax: +49-228- 815-1999; e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.int; internet:  http://unfccc.int/meetings/unfccc_calendar/items/2655.php