---
title: "INC-11 HIGHLIGHTS: MONDAY, 6 FEBRUARY 1995"
id: 1202000e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/1202000e
date: 1995-02-06
abstract: ""
---

# PLENARY

INC Chair Rau'l Estrada-Oyuela opened INC-11 by noting a  sense of satisfaction that 118 States and the EEC have  ratified the Convention. He said that one of the most  important tasks of this session is the review of the first  15 national reports submitted by Annex I developed  countries. With regard to commitments, he stated that while  some believe that after the year 2000 countries can increase  their CO2 emissions, this is not the case. Annex I countries  are legally bound to reduce their emissions to 1990 levels  by the year 2000. If this is not enough to stabilize  greenhouse gas concentrations, new commitments will be  necessary. Agreement on these new commitments will not be  easy and may require greater involvement of large developing  countries.

INC Executive-Secretary Michael Zammit Cutajar then  introduced the provisional agenda (A/AC.23/77), which  delegates adopted. With regard to the schedule of work, the  Philippines, on behalf of the G-77, requested that the  discussion on the rules of procedure (Agenda Item 6) take  place on Friday, instead of Wednesday. Trinidad and Tobago,  on behalf of AOSIS, mentioned that it had submitted a  protocol for consideration and wants time to discuss it.  Germany added that it wants to present its elements paper on  a possible protocol. The Committee agreed that AOSIS and  Germany would present their proposals on Wednesday morning  and that the rules of procedure would be discussed on  Friday. The Committee then adopted the schedule of work  (A/AC.237/77, Annex II), as amended.

The Philippines, supported by Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, also  requested that the meeting adjourn early in deference to the  religious duty of Muslims during Ramadan. The Chair  responded that this is a matter for the General Assembly,  not the Committee, and that the schedule would not be  changed.

In his opening statement, Bert Bolin, Chair of the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), raised  three issues: recent findings regarding radiative forcing of  the atmosphere and the interpretation of the IPCC emission  scenarios that are dealt with in the IPCC 1994 Special  Report; the intensified general debate concerning knowledge  about climate change; and the role of the IPCC in the future  work of the Convention. With regard to the latter, he said  that it is most important that the future status of the IPCC  relative to the COP be clarified so that countries can  decide on ways and means to support the IPCC financially.

Mohamed El-Ashry, CEO and Chair of the Global Environment  Facility (GEF), noted that the Interim Secretariat of the  Convention and the GEF have reached agreement on GEF  arrangements to fund enabling activities and preparations  for national communications. At its first meeting in July,  the GEF Council approved a two-track programme of work. The  first track will produce an overarching operational  strategy, as well as specific strategies for the focal   areas. The second will allocate limited resources to a  relatively small number of activities on which guidance is  fairly clear. He added that the GEF, in its replenished and  restructured form, responds to the requirements of Articles  21(3) and 11 of the Convention, and is ready to serve as the  permanent financial mechanism for the Convention.

The Committee then addressed Agenda Item 3, Status of  ratification of the Convention (A/AC.237/INF.15/Rev.2). The  Secretariat noted that 118 States and the EEC had deposited  their instruments of ratification in time to participate in  COP-1. Thailand, Kuwait, the Russian Federation, the Solomon  Islands, Saudi Arabia and Mali announced that they had  recently ratified the Convention. Kiribati noted that its  instrument of ratification was forwarded in mid-December and  asked the Secretariat to check on it. Tanzania expects to  ratify the Convention before the first COP. Turkey has not  signed the Convention because it is considered an Annex I  country. Colombia expects to ratify the Convention soon.

# WORKING GROUP I

Working Group I first addressed Agenda Item 7, Questions for  the IPCC Chair. France, on behalf of the EU, asked Dr. Bolin  whether substantial reductions in emissions would be  necessary and if Annex I countries' actions would be  insufficient to prevent greenhouse warming. New Zealand  inquired about the inclusion of short-lived gases in warming  estimates and how uncertainties regarding Global Warming  Potentials (GWPs) could be reduced. Bolin responded that the  IPCC believes GWPs are a useful approach even though short- lived gases cannot be included. Japan called for greater  mitigation by all parties.

Benin inquired whether the IPCC had developed methodologies  for analyzing regional effects on precipitation. Bolin said  that current models could not produce consistent regional  results. The Netherlands said it was obvious that  commitments need to be strengthened and that action should  be taken at COP-1. He also recommended continued funding for  the IPCC. The US asked what the IPCC recommended for next  steps in its work and how the IPCC relates to the SBSTA. He  recommended that support for the IPCC budget could be part  of INC discussions, but should also be taken up by the COP.  Bolin suggested three areas for joint work with the SBSTA:  sources and sinks, recent changes and methodologies. China  questioned the effects of solar activity, the role of  clouds, forests and the biosphere, and long-term cycles of  natural climatic variation. Bolin noted that it is possible  to distinguish between natural variations and those from  fossil fuels, and the issue in long-term cycles is whether  adjustments can be made if the rate of change is  accelerating. Saudi Arabia, supported by Kuwait, suggested  that increasing uncertainties in emissions scenarios with  longer time scales, downward revisions in estimates of sea  level rise, and differences in social costs of mitigation  options require a cautious approach on adequacy of  commitments.

### AGENDA ITEM 7(D) - METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES

The Secretariat   invited discussion of document A/AC/237/84, on  methodological issues. France, on behalf of the EU,  recommended continued use of draft guidelines for national  communication, and collaboration between subsidiary bodies  of the Convention and the IPCC on revisions of the  guidelines. He said additional effort should be made to  reduce uncertainty in GWPs but that parties should use them  if they wish. Japan supported the GWP position and said that  the inventory methodologies could be used by Annex 1 and  non-Annex 1 Parties. Australia said Parties should continue  to have the flexibility to use country-specific approaches  that are comparable to IPCC guidelines and also supported  continued use of GWPs. Poland said revisions of guidelines  should follow periodicity of national communications. The US  supported use of GWPs and IPCC vulnerability assessment  methodologies. He suggested future work on inventory  guidelines, impacts and mitigation methodologies and others  will ultimately be the responsibility of SBSTA and the  Convention Parties, not the IPCC or other multilateral  organizations, and that COP-1 could remand the issue to  SBSTA. The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)  asked whether the Convention will be actively involved in  controlling aircraft emissions, suggesting that this would  duplicate ICAO's activities. Romania said inventories may be  difficult based on available data, and that the COP should  take this into consideration. China said IPCC guidelines are  difficult to apply, especially for developing countries. He  suggested calculating emissions per capita as an alternative  methodology. The Chair said she would develop a revised  draft based on delegates' comments.

### AGENDA ITEM 7(A) - FIRST REVIEW OF NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS

The Secretariat presented a summary of A/AC.237/81, a  compilation and synthesis of national communications from  Annex I Parties, and A/AC.237/82, an overview of issues  related to national communications. He noted that the 15  Parties submitting national communications included in the  synthesis represented 41% of global emissions. Since  compiling the synthesis report, the Secretariat has received  five more communications and two preliminary ones.

Compared to 1990 levels and excluding land use change and  forestry, nine parties projected increased CO2 emissions for  2000 in the absence of additional measures, five parties  projected stabilization or a decrease, and one Party  projected a decrease by 2005. The report shows CO2 accounts  for 75% of emissions reported, aggregated by fuel  consumption, with energy and transformation industries the  largest sector and transport second. For CH4, all but two  parties projected a decrease compared to 1990 emissions. No  clear picture emerged for NO2. Parties reported  approximately 700 policies and measures with the largest  percentage directed at residential, commercial, and  institutional and transportation sectors.

# WORKING GROUP II

The Working Group first addressed Agenda Item 8(a),  Questions to the GEF Chair/CEO Mohammed El-Ashry. France, on   behalf of the EU, asked about the criteria for choosing the  projects to be presented at the next GEF council meeting,  and possible tools for GEF action on climate change. El- Ashry responded that the overarching GEF strategy would  emerge as the Convention proceeds, and that the existing  guidelines for projects were primarily for enabling  activities.  He stated the GEF alone does not have  sufficient funding for all proposals and must look to other  means to mobilize resources.

Following a question from Antigua and Barbuda on the role of  the COP and the GEF in project consideration, and recourse  for projects denied funding, El-Ashry stated that the  division of labor between the GEF, the COP and the INC is  contained in the Convention, and that continuation of the  cooperative spirit between GEF and the COP in project  development would help avoid misunderstandings. Colombia  later asked for further clarification, and El-Ashry again  noted that both GEF and Convention secretariats will be  involved in the decision making process.

Benin asked: 1) how many projects can the GEF launch per  country; 2) is there a regional distribution plan for GEF  projects; and 3) is there a plan for distribution of funds  among the GEF's four focal areas.  El-Ashry replied that the  number of projects per country depends on the capacity of  the country and the institution. Rules on regional  distribution or allocation existed only in the pilot phase  and distribution of funds among focal areas has not yet been  done, but may be in the future. Saudi Arabia stated that the  GEF Council has overlooked the importance of implementing  activities in developing countries. These countries need  substantial funding to establish a sound infrastructure, and  it appears, based on the GEF Council figures on funding for  enabling activities, that the GEF will face high  administrative costs in implementing projects.  El-Ashry  answered that they are currently trying to deal with  coordination at the country level to ensure the provision of  resources, not administrative costs.

Nigeria commented that some projects are primarily of local  rather than international relevance. He asked how these  projects are conceived to address issues of local  importance, while meeting the GEF's requirements for  regional and global relevance. Egypt stated that capacity  building must have an objective determined by the developing  country itself and asked whether projects could be co-funded  by the implementing agency. El-Ashry answered that the  global environment only benefits if the local environment  benefits.

### AGENDA ITEM 8(B) - MAINTENANCE OF INTERIM ARRANGEMENTS

The  Working Group then considered the draft decision on  maintenance of interim financial arrangements. The EU, the  US, Australia, Canada, Japan and Poland supported  designating the GEF as the permanent entity entrusted with  the operation of the financial mechanism. The Philippines,  on behalf of the G-77, Peru, China and Benin commented that  progress had been made during the GEF restructuring, but the   GEF needs further modification in its representation as well  as additional funds before it can be designated as the  permanent financial mechanism. The G-77 offered amendments  to the draft, so that the GEF would remain the interim  financial mechanism and the situation would be reviewed at  the third session of the COP.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

On Monday, delegates agreed that AOSIS could present its  draft protocol to the Committee on Wednesday. This protocol,  which calls for a reduction of emissions of greenhouse gases  by at least 20% by the year 2005, has been the subject of  discussion in the corridors and during the intersessional  period. It appears as though an agreement has been reached  whereupon there will be no negotiation of this protocol  until the COP. Although the Chair made the point that the  protocol might be discussed during Working Group I's review  of the adequacy of commitments on Wednesday afternoon, few  expect much progress at this session.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### WORKING GROUP I

Working Group I will continue with Agenda  Item 7(a), First review of national communications.

### WORKING GROUP II

Working Group II will continue  consideration of the financial mechanism. The Group will  first resume discussion on Agenda Item 8(b), Maintenance of  interim arrangements, before considering Agenda Item  8(a)(I), Guidance.

### NGO SEMINAR

The Conservation Law Foundation and the  Foundation for International Environmental Law and  Development invite all delegates and NGOs to a seminar on  'Energy-Efficiency as a Climate Change Strategy: Past  Success and Future Promise' from 1:30 - 3:00 pm. The room  will be announced.