---
title: "REPORT OF THE FOURTH CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE UN FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE: 2-13 NOVEMBER 1998"
id: enb1297e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1297e
date: 1998-11-13
abstract: "The Fourth Conference of the Parties to the UN Framework  Convention on Climate Change (FCCC) was held from 2-13 November  1998 in Buenos Aires, Argentina, and was attended by over 5,000  participants. During the two-week meeting, delegates deliberated  decisions for the COP during the ninth sessions of the  Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI-9) and the Subsidiary  Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA-9). Issues  related to the Kyoto Protocol were considered in joint SBI/SBSTA  sessions. A high-level segment, which heard statements from over  100 ministers and heads of delegation, was convened on Thursday,  12 November."
---

Following hours of high-level 'closed door' negotiations and a  final plenary session that concluded early Saturday morning,  delegates adopted the Buenos Aires Plan of Action. Under the  Plan of Action, the Parties declared their determination to  strengthen the implementation of the Convention and prepare for  the future entry into force of the Kyoto Protocol. The Plan  contains the Parties' resolution to demonstrate substantial  progress on: the financial mechanism; the development and  transfer of technology; the implementation of FCCC Articles 4.8  and 4.9, as well as Protocol Articles 2.3 and 3.14; activities  implemented jointly (AIJ); the mechanisms of the Kyoto Protocol;  and the preparations for COP/MOP-1.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FCCC AND THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change was  adopted on 9 May 1992, and was opened for signature at the UN  Conference on Environment and Development in June 1992. The  Convention entered into force on 21 March 1994, 90 days after  receipt of the 50th ratification. It currently has been ratified  by 176 countries.

### COP-1

The first meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the  FCCC (COP-1) took place in Berlin from 28 March - 7 April 1995.  In addition to addressing a number of important issues related  to the future of the Convention, delegates reached agreement on  what many believed to be the central issue before COP-1 -  adequacy of commitments, the 'Berlin Mandate.' The result was to  establish an open-ended Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate  (AGBM) to begin a process toward appropriate action for the  period beyond 2000, including the strengthening of the  commitments of Annex I Parties through the adoption of a  protocol or another legal instrument.

COP-1 also requested the Secretariat to make arrangements for  sessions of SBSTA and SBI. SBSTA would serve as the link between  scientific, technical and technological assessments, the  information provided by competent international bodies, and the  policy-oriented needs of the COP. During the AGBM process, SBSTA  addressed several issues, including the treatment of the IPCC's  Second Assessment Report (SAR). SBI was created to develop  recommendations to assist the COP in the review and assessment  of the implementation of the Convention and in the preparation  and implementation of its decisions. SBI also addressed several  key issues during the AGBM process, such as the national  communications and activities implemented jointly (AIJ).

The Ad Hoc Group on Article 13 (AG13) was set up to consider the  establishment of a multilateral consultative process available  to Parties to resolve questions on implementation. AG13-1, held  from 30-31 October 1995 in Geneva, decided to request Parties,  non-Parties, and intergovernmental and non-governmental  organizations to make written submissions in response to a  questionnaire on a multilateral consultative process (MCP).  Delegates continued their discussion over the course of three  meetings. At their fifth session, they agreed that the MCP  should be advisory rather than supervisory in nature and AG13  should complete its work by COP-4.

### AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE

The AGBM met eight times  between August 1995 and COP-3 in December 1997. During the first  three sessions, delegates focused on analyzing and assessing  possible policies and measures to strengthen the commitments of  Annex I Parties, how Annex I countries might distribute or share  new commitments and whether commitments should take the form of  an amendment or protocol. AGBM-4, which coincided with COP-2 in  Geneva in July 1996, completed its in-depth analysis of the  likely elements of a protocol and States appeared ready to  prepare a negotiating text. At AGBM-5, which met in December  1996, delegates recognized the need to decide whether or not to  allow mechanisms that would provide Annex I Parties with  flexibility in meeting quantified emission limitation and  reduction objectives (QELROs).

As the Protocol was drafted during the sixth and seventh  sessions of the AGBM, in March and August 1997, respectively,  delegates 'streamlined' a framework compilation text by merging  or eliminating some overlapping provisions within the myriad of  proposals. Much of the discussion centered on a proposal from  the EU for a 15% cut in a 'basket' of three greenhouse gases by  the year 2010 compared to 1990 levels. In October 1997, as AGBM- 8 began, US President Bill Clinton included a call for  'meaningful participation' by developing countries in the  negotiating position he announced in Washington. With those  words, the debates that shaped agreement back in 1995  resurfaced, with an insistence on G-77/China involvement once  again linked to the level of ambition acceptable by the US. In  response, the G-77/China distanced itself from attempts to draw  developing countries into agreeing to anything that could be  interpreted as new commitments.

### COP-3

The Third Conference of the Parties (COP-3) to the FCCC  was held from 1 - 11 December 1997 in Kyoto, Japan. Over 10,000  participants, including representatives from governments,  intergovernmental organizations, NGOs and the press, attended  the Conference, which included a high-level segment featuring  statements from over 125 ministers. Following a week and a half  of intense formal and informal negotiations, including a session  that began on the final evening and lasted into the following  day, Parties to the FCCC adopted the Kyoto Protocol on 11  December.

In the Kyoto Protocol, Annex I Parties to the FCCC agreed to  commitments with a view to reducing their overall emissions of  six greenhouse gases (GHGs) by at least 5% below 1990 levels  between 2008 and 2012. The Protocol also establishes emissions  trading, 'joint implementation' between developed countries, and  a 'clean development mechanism' (CDM) to encourage joint  emissions reduction projects between developed and developing  countries. As of 13 November 1998, 60 countries have signed the  Kyoto Protocol.

### POST-KYOTO FCCC MEETINGS

The subsidiary bodies of the FCCC met  from 2-12 June 1998 in Bonn, Germany. These were the first  formal FCCC meetings since the adoption of the Kyoto Protocol.  SBSTA-8 agreed to draft conclusions on, inter alia, cooperation  with relevant international organizations, methodological  issues, and education and training. SBI-8 reached conclusions  on, inter alia, national communications, the financial mechanism  and the second review of adequacy of Annex I Party commitments.  In its sixth session, the AG13-6 concluded its work on the  functions of the Multilateral Consultative Process (MCP). After  joint SBI/SBSTA consideration and extensive contact group  debates on the flexibility mechanisms, delegates could only  agree to a compilation document containing proposals from the G-77/China, the EU and the US on the issues for discussion and  frameworks for implementation.

# REPORT OF COP-4 PLENARY

In opening plenary on Monday, 2 November, COP-3 President  Hiroshi Ohki (Japan) recalled the important role played by COP-3  in responding to the Berlin Mandate and said COP-4 faces the  challenge of maintaining the political momentum created in  Kyoto. He noted the need to review existing economic structures  and re-examine lifestyles.

Maria Julia Alsogaray, Secretary of Natural Resources and  Sustainable Development of Argentina, was elected President of  COP-4. She noted that while Argentina was not one of the  countries that has 'historic responsibilities' for the climate  change problem, it wished to belong to the group holding future  responsibilities for commitment leading to a solution. She said  she wanted COP-4 to signal a new momentum in the process and  said an action plan for future work should be established. She  stated that developing countries share some responsibility for  climate change and they have an ethical duty to ensure  sustainable development.

Michael Zammit Cutajar, Executive Secretary of the FCCC, noted  that this was the first COP to be held in a developing country.  He anticipated that an action plan with ambitious and  politically firm deadlines would be created as a result of this  meeting. He said COP-4 presented an opportunity to revitalize  the FCCC, perhaps through strengthening the transfer of  technology and know-how and financial support. COP-4 could mark  the occasion where the business community increased its role in  combating climate change through efficient programmes conducted  in an equitable way.

The following delegates were then elected as officers of the  COP: Papa Cham (The Gambia); Mohamed Al Sabban (Saudi Arabia);  Tengiz Gzirishvili (Georgia); Harald Dovland (Norway); Ole  Plougmann (Denmark); Espen Rønneberg, (Marshall Islands); John  Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda); Bakary Kante (Senegal); Kok Kee Chow  (Malaysia); and Maciej Sadowski (Poland).

On organizational matters, the Executive Secretary proposed  changes to the provisional agenda (FCCC/CP/1998/1). SAUDI  ARABIA, supported by KUWAIT, proposed addressing Protocol  Articles 2.3 and 3.14 (adverse impacts) as a separate item on  the agenda. MAURITANIA noted that no objections were raised to  the proposed agenda changes during informal consultations on 1  November. As a compromise, the Executive Secretary proposed  adding Protocol Articles 2.3 and 3.14 in parentheses to the  agenda item on FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9 (adverse impacts).  SAUDI ARABIA, supported by VENEZUELA, accepted the proposal, but  stressed that discussion under Item 5 (matters related to the  Kyoto Protocol) should allow time for Articles 2.3 and 3.14. The  plenary adjourned to allow the subsidiary bodies to begin their  work.

On Friday, 6 November, delegates met in a 'stock-taking'  plenary. COP-4 President Alsogaray offered condolences to the  Caribbean and Latin American countries devastated by Hurricane  Mitch. She noted that floods, fires, droughts and hurricanes had  profoundly affected countries around the world and suggested  that 'Mother Nature' was reminding delegates that urgent action  was needed. Delegates observed a moment of silence for the  recent tragedies at the request of INDONESIA, on behalf of the  G-77/China. He also proposed that the Secretariat draft a  statement of sympathy for the affected countries. The President  also reported that Antigua and Barbuda ratified the Kyoto  Protocol on 3 November.

Delegates also heard reports from the Chairs of the Subsidiary  Bodies. The Chair of AG13, Patrick Széll (UK), presented the  draft decision on the Multilateral Consultative Process  (FCCC/CP/1998/L.3). He reported that Parties had accepted the  thrust of the proposal. However, delegates did not agree on the  size and composition of the Multilateral Consultative Committee.  The President said she would hold intersessional meetings to  tackle outstanding issues.

Delegates also heard statements from: Hama Arba Diallo,  Executive Secretary of the UN Convention to Combat  Desertification (CCD); William Kennedy, Senior Officer for the  European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD);  Prodipto Ghosh, Senior Environment Specialist from the Asian  Development Bank (ADB); and Walter Arensberg, Chief of the  Environmental Division of the Inter-American Development Bank  (IDB); and the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)  Secretariat.

Voluntary Commitments: During the plenary on Monday, 2 November,  delegates discussed voluntary commitments by non-Annex I Parties  (Agenda Item 6) when considering the agenda. ARGENTINA recalled  its request to include this item on the agenda and noted that no  consensus had emerged despite its efforts to encourage  consultations.

INDONESIA, on behalf of the G-77/CHINA, said this issue had been  deliberated at length, but no consensus had been reached. He  proposed adoption of the agenda without Item 6. INDIA recalled  that the debate at Kyoto rejected the idea of voluntary  commitments, stating it was not implied in the principle of  common but differentiated responsibilities. SAUDI ARABIA,  KUWAIT, VENEZUELA and ALGERIA cautioned that discussion of the  issue at this stage would be divisive and distract from  discussions of compliance and continuing increases in developed  countries' emissions. BRAZIL described the FCCC as an exercise  in burden sharing, recognizing differentiated responsibilities  between Annex I and non-Annex I Parties. He noted that non-Annex  I Parties are well ahead in meeting their existing commitments  and, with CHINA, cautioned that this item was not intended to  promote the FCCC, but to help some countries avoid existing  commitments. IRAN and UNITED ARAB EMIRATES noted that neither  the FCCC nor the Kyoto Protocol provides for voluntary  commitments and cautioned that the discussion could lead to the  imposition of commitments on developing countries.

CHINA noted that developed country emissions were projected to  be 5% above 1990 levels by 2000 and 13% above 1990 levels by  2010. He distinguished developing country 'survival emissions'  from developed country 'luxury emissions' and said developing  countries risked losing financial assistance and technology  transfer under the FCCC. He said voluntary commitments would  create a new category of Parties under the FCCC and could  destroy the unity of the G-77/China. He said the COP Presidency  should remain neutral. QATAR, TOGO, CUBA, THAILAND and UGANDA  supported the G-77/China.

ZIMBABWE, TANZANIA and SOUTH AFRICA said methodological and  institutional issues relating to the flexibility mechanisms,  such as the CDM, should be the focus of deliberation. SAMOA  acknowledged that the Convention and its objectives stood to  gain from a further discussion of voluntary commitments, but  discussion at this stage would be detrimental. Discussions  should focus on what could be expected from developing countries  and initiatives Annex I countries could take to assist  developing countries. COLOMBIA suggested that the vulnerability  of developing nations, rather than their commitments, be  discussed. CHILE said several developing countries were making  serious efforts to limit GHG emissions and favored an exchange  of views on voluntary cooperation, without entailing binding  obligations or ignoring the principle of common but  differentiated responsibilities.

AUSTRALIA noted that Annex I countries alone cannot fulfill the  goals of the FCCC and said it was a sensitive issue that should  be discussed in a non-controversial manner. With JAPAN, she said  that non-Annex I Parties wishing to adopt voluntary commitments  must be given an opportunity to consider their options under the  Kyoto Protocol.

The US expressed regret that divisions among Parties would  prevent delegates from putting all the issues on the table at  this session. An open and full discussion on options could  clarify a number of questions, including: how Parties would join  Annex B; how base years would be determined; how Parties would  develop targets; and whether Parties would still be able to host  CDM projects. With JAPAN and CANADA, NEW ZEALAND supported a  discussion on this item. He said if this were not done, the  President should use her prerogative to facilitate informal  consultations. The RUSSIAN FEDERATION reminded delegates that  within 15 years, emissions from non-Annex I countries would  exceed those of Annex I countries. The CZECH REPUBLIC, with  HUNGARY and SLOVENIA, supported the inclusion of Item 6 and  noted that it could foster useful debate and dialogue. POLAND  said if Parties wanted to adhere to FCCC goals, they should be  encouraged to assume voluntary commitments. This dialogue would  reflect the dynamic situation in the global economy and changes  within Parties.

AUSTRIA, on behalf of the EU, said the question of broadening  commitments in the long term is necessary and unavoidable. He  recognized the achievements of many non-Annex I countries. He  said it may not be possible to resolve this issue in plenary and  proposed that the COP President take a decision on how to  proceed.

ARGENTINA said no aspect of the FCCC and the Protocol limited  its ability to raise the issue of voluntary commitments. He said  the manner in which delegates address the issue would require  discussion. Delegates adopted the provisional agenda without  Item 6, as no consensus existed on its inclusion. The President  noted that as several Parties had expressed interest in  continuing discussion, she would facilitate informal  consultations. CHINA cautioned against the proposed informal  consultations, stating they could jeopardize the neutrality of  the presidency. INDIA and SAUDI ARABIA observed that the item  had been deleted because there was no consensus on further  discussion. Voluntary commitments should not be considered and  the President should not participate in consultations.

# SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE

SBSTA, chaired by Kok Kee Chow (Malaysia), held ten meetings,  including several joint sessions with SBI to discuss, inter  alia, the Kyoto Protocol mechanisms. SBSTA considered: land use  change and forestry; impact of single projects on emissions;  research and systematic observations; methodological issues;  scientific and methodological aspects of the proposal by Brazil;  development and transfer of technology; and other matters.  Several contact groups met to further discuss issues and draft  conclusions. For many issues, delegates could not reach  agreement in the contact groups and the draft decisions were  forwarded to the COP with brackets. Outstanding issues were then  discussed behind closed doors in high level consultations and  the decisions were presented in final plenary.

Land use change and forestry: On Tuesday, 3 November, Paul  Maclons (South Africa) and Maciej Sadowski (Poland) reported on  a recent workshop they co-chaired at the request of SBSTA-8. The  workshop focused on data availability based on definitions used  by Parties and international organizations, including their  implications, in relation to Kyoto Protocol Article 3.3  (forests). The workshop coincided with an IPCC expert meeting  that aimed to prepare an outline for the special report. The Co- Chairs noted that SBSTA may need to clarify whether and when the  IPCC should develop detailed tables, formats and instructions  for addressing the implications of the Kyoto Protocol on the  Revised Guidelines for national greenhouse gas (GHG)  inventories.

BRAZIL noted that this issue alone could undermine the Kyoto  Protocol if the COP takes a wrong decision on how to account for  the influence of forestry on GHG concentrations. NORWAY said the  workshop revealed that credits for carbon sinks under Protocol  Article 3.3 might be negative, while the forest, as a whole,  remains a sink. SWITZERLAND, with the MARSHALL ISLANDS, favored  deferring work related to Articles 3.3 and 3.4 (agricultural  soils) until the IPCC special report is available. CANADA  highlighted the capacity of soils to sequester carbon and noted  the opportunity this presented to farmers in pursuing  sustainable land management practices. The PHILIPPINES, the  MARSHALL ISLANDS and ARGENTINA supported an increase in the IPCC  budget to ensure full participation by developing country  experts. The US underscored the ancillary benefits of  sequestration activities and said excluding these would violate  the Convention. JAPAN submitted two papers relating to Articles  3.3 and 3.4 containing items to be examined and supporting the  work schedule agreed at SBSTA-8.

On Tuesday, 10 November, delegates considered the Chair's draft  conclusions on land use change and forestry  (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.7). The conclusions called for the  organization of a second SBSTA workshop prior to the tenth  session to focus on issues related to Article 3.4 of the Kyoto  Protocol (such as methodologies, uncertainties, and research and  data needs) and welcomed the US offer to provide a venue. SBSTA  invited Parties to provide submissions on issues to be  considered at the workshop. At the request of the RUSSIAN  FEDERATION and other Parties, the title of the draft conclusion  was amended to read 'land use, land use change and forestry.'  The draft conclusions were adopted as amended.

The COP adopted the decision on land use, land use change and  forestry in final plenary (FCCC/CP/1998/L.5).

Impact of single projects on emissions: On Tuesday, 3 November,  ICELAND submitted a draft decision that provides for process  emissions from a single project, coming into operation after  1990 and contributing more than 5%, in the first commitment  period, to the total greenhouse gas emissions of an Annex B  Party, to be reported separately and not be included in the  national total. This would allow the Party to exceed its  assigned amount provided that the total emissions of the Party  are less than 0.05% of Annex I emissions in 1990. ICELAND said  this was necessary in small economies because of the high  proportional impact of single projects.

The MARSHALL ISLANDS, supported by BRAZIL, BARBADOS and TUVALU,  said the draft decision would lead to special dispensations  prior to the Kyoto Protocol's entry into force and could create  an incentive for emissions increases in Annex I countries. With  AUSTRIA, CANADA and BARBADOS, he requested more time for  consultations. AUSTRALIA recognized the impact of single  projects on small economies and supported establishing  guidelines and methodologies to specify circumstances under  which single projects could be accommodated. CANADA and BRAZIL  said the draft decision could set a precedent affecting the  integrity of the Protocol.

The US said the differentiation in assigned amounts in the  Protocol allows for differences in national circumstances. He  stated that Iceland's draft decision was consistent with the  Protocol. ICELAND noted that this issue was identified at COP-3  and it was raised now to facilitate ratification of the  Protocol. He distinguished between significant proportional  impacts resulting from planned projects, and unexpected events.  ANTIGUA and BARBUDA opposed the idea of exceptions to the Kyoto  Protocol.

On Tuesday, 10 November, delegates considered the Chair's draft  conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.9), which were based on  informal consultations. Under the conclusions, SBSTA would  further consider the issue at its tenth session. Supporting the  draft decision, the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS)  cautioned against granting exemptions prior to the Protocol's  entry into force and said Parties should explore other options.  ICELAND stressed that only projects with demonstrable global  benefit would fall under the draft decision, if they could not  be accommodated within the Party's assigned amount. On the issue  of precedence, he said other cases should be valued on their own  merits. The draft conclusions were accepted for forwarding to  the COP. COP-4 adopted a decision on the issue in final plenary  (FCCC/CP/1998/L.8).

Research and systematic observation: On Wednesday, 4 November,  Global Climate Observing Systems (GCOS) presented a Report on  the Adequacy of Global Climate Observing Systems. It  recommended, inter alia, that Parties prepare national plans and  exchange relevant data. The Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS)  also made a presentation. Following a number of statements, the  SBSTA Chair noted an emerging consensus to address the  deterioration of observing systems and proposed informal  consultations chaired by Dr. Sue Barrell (Australia) and Dr.  Mohammed Mhita (Tanzania). Delegates continued discussing the  GCOS Report and the significance of its work during SBSTA  plenary and called for expansion of research and systematic  observation. Many highlighted the need to focus research and  systematic observation systems on developing countries and  issues that were relevant to them to combat the deterioration of  these systems.

On Monday, 9 November, delegates considered draft conclusions of  the informal consultations on research and systematic  observation (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.6). The draft conclusions  outlined decisions to develop an action plan to consider options  for implementation and requested the Secretariat to compile a  report on priorities for action to improve global observing  systems in relation to the needs of the Convention. The RUSSIAN  FEDERATION proposed inclusion of systems for the measurement of  GHGs and other atmospheric components, reference to satellite  systems for data collection, and distinction between  anthropogenic and natural climate change variations. He  suggested that the draft be amended to indicate that national  meteorological systems also measure GHG emissions. Delegates  debated references to atmospheric observing systems and  measurement of greenhouse gas concentrations and agreed to text  that 'urges Parties to actively support national meteorological  and atmospheric observing systems, including measurement of  greenhouse gases.' Delegates also debated language requesting  Parties to submit information on their participation in global  climate observing systems and requesting SBSTA to report to COP- 5 on developments regarding observational networks. The decision  was adopted as amended.

SBSTA also considered the Chair's recommendation on the  relationship between efforts to protect the stratospheric ozone  layer and efforts to safeguard the global climate system  (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.8). The RUSSIAN FEDERATION said the process  was moving ahead too quickly and there was no need to prepare a  document to be considered at the next COP. The Chair explained  that a 'step by step approach' was embodied in the document,  from the invitation to various bodies to provide information to  the report by the SBSTA to the next COP. The Chair clarified  that the decision on the matter would be taken at SBSTA-11,  which would give the Secretariat ample time. The RUSSIAN  FEDERATION suggested deleting the requirement of a report from  the Secretariat, since the IPCC Report could provide the  required information. The Chair clarified there would be two  separate reports and the draft decision was adopted, despite the  objection of the Russian Federation to portions of the text.  COP-4 adopted the decision on the issue in final plenary  (FCCC/CP/1998/L.4).

Methodological Issues for GHG Inventories: SBSTA considered this  issue under the agenda item on 'Other matters.' On Thursday, 5  November, SBSTA Chair Kok Kee Chow explained that the  methodological issues relating to Annex I national  communications would be discussed at an expert workshop to be  held in December by the Secretariat (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/7,  FCCC/SBSTA/1998/8, FCCC/SBSTA/1998/MISC.6 and Add.1). The  Secretariat described work conducted and previous meetings held  and outlined the plan for development of appropriate guidelines.  The conclusions of the workshop would be discussed at SBSTA-10.  John Christensen (UNEP) provided background to an international  collaborative report on methodological issues. The US called for  the resolution of these issues and expected to use them to  develop guidelines and national measurement systems that could  be ratified by COP-6. The US proposed that the December workshop  consider methodological, reporting, review and assessment  issues. NORWAY sought continual re-evaluation of inventory data,  including base years, as methodologies improve. Chair Chow  proposed that he prepare a draft decision for consideration by  SBSTA.

With SWITZERLAND, the EU recognized that there is a link between  the Montreal and Kyoto Protocols. He requested the subsidiary  bodies to provide a list of available technologies to limit and  reduce emissions of HFCs and PFCs. The US, with AUSTRALIA, said  there should be coordination between international environmental  agreements, but the process required careful consideration given  the possible implications for industry. He proposed that SBSTA  consider the impact of the phase out of substances covered under  the Montreal Protocol and asked that they consult with that  body. Chair Chow proposed holding consultations on this matter.

On Tuesday, 10 November, delegates considered the draft  conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.10) on methodological issues.  They noted the preparations of a workshop to be held from 9-11  December to resolve the identified methodological issues on GHG  inventories. It requested the Secretariat to, inter alia,  prepare a report on the revised guidelines for Annex I  communications, particularly on the GHG inventory section, and  consult with the IPCC on a comprehensive joint plan for the  inventory programme. The conclusions were adopted by SBSTA.

SCIENTIFIC AND METHODOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF THE Proposal BY Brazil:  On Tuesday, 3 November, delegates discussed the scientific and  methodological aspects of a proposal from Brazil, which was made  during the AGBM process and forwarded by COP-3 to SBSTA. BRAZIL  described it as the allocation of responsibilities among  different emitters based on their actions as measured by the  increase in global temperatures, rather than by emissions.  INDONESIA supported discussion of the issue. GEORGIA stressed  that monitoring of GHGs needed enhancement. The US said using  temperature change as the sole indicator of responsibility  ignored relevant socio-economic factors.

On Monday, 9 November, delegates adopted draft conclusions on  the scientific and methodological aspects of the proposal by  Brazil. Under the conclusions, SBSTA decided to consider the  issue further and called on Brazil to report at SBSTA's next  session. The conclusions were adopted by SBSTA.

Development and transfer of technology: On Thursday, 5 November,  SBSTA considered development and transfer of technology  (FCCC/CP/1998/6; FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.5 and Add.1-2;  FCCC/TP/1998/1; FCCC/CP/1998/11/Add.1). The G-77/CHINA said  without practical technical know-how, technology transfer would  be impossible. ARGENTINA, with AOSIS, stressed the need to  consider adaptation as well as mitigation. He supported a role  for the Secretariat in linking providers and recipients of  technology and for international organizations in providing  resources. With GRENADA and the REPUBLIC OF KOREA, CHINA  emphasized the role of national governments and international  organizations and said technology transfer should be on non- commercial and preferential terms. She added that transfer of  technology relates to the Convention and should not be linked to  the Kyoto Protocol. She questioned assessment of experiences,  noting minimal progress in technology transfer since 1992, and  favored focusing on existing technologies over assessment of  emerging technologies.

Noting the need for an enabling environment and the potential of  the CDM, CANADA and AUSTRALIA said the private sector should be  the main vehicle for technology transfer. The REPUBLIC OF KOREA  and CANADA supported work on inventories for sources of new  technologies and gap identification. AUSTRALIA supported  analysis of barriers to technology transfer and suggested SBSTA  draw on its roster of experts. He proposed the establishment of  an Internet-based network to enhance information dissemination.  With the US, the REPUBLIC OF KOREA said debates on conceptual  issues should not impede progress of the work programme. The US  proposed that the Secretariat prepare a report on technology  transfer and development efforts by Parties for consideration by  SBSTA at its next session and endorsed the Secretariat's  proposal to establish a consultative process to develop  consensus on next steps. A contact group chaired by Wanna  Tanunchaiwatana (Thailand) and Renata Christ (European  Commission) was convened to discuss the issue.

On Thursday, 5 November, a contact group discussed three draft  decisions proposed by the US, the G-77/China and the EU  (FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.5/Add.3). The US said communications between  Parties were hindered by the differing understandings of the  issues. He said technology transfer should be based on country  specific needs and proposed that reference be made to successful  programmes. He supported the Secretariat's proposal for a  consultative process that would facilitate dialogue between  Parties.

The G-77/China proposal focused on identifying means of linking  the issues and providing an interface between the providers of  technology and the recipients. It proposed a technology transfer  mechanism (TTM) 'to assist developing country Parties to obtain  their needed environmentally sound technologies and know-how,  conducive to addressing climate change, on non-commercial and  preferential terms and thus contribute to the ultimate objective  of the Convention.' There was consensus on the capacity building  section of the G-77/China proposal, which called for efforts to  enhance endogenous capacities and provide enabling environments.  The US opposed the G-77/China proposal for a TTM since it would  be difficult to agree on its terms of reference. He also opposed  the reference to 'non-commercial, preferential terms.' He  recalled that the reference was rejected when the Convention was  being negotiated. The delegates debated, inter alia: the  necessity, possible form and functions of the TTM; issues  relating to the transfer of public domain technology; the  features of a consultative process; and the role of dialogue  between Parties.

The Chair noted the emerging consensus on: the need for  progress; the terms outlined in the capacity building section of  the G-77/China proposal; and the need for dialogue consultations  and information exchange. She noted that there was a convergence  between aspects of the Parties' positions, although an agreement  on terminology was needed. She said there was disagreement on  whether to have a 'mechanism/process/system/facility,' its forms  and functions, and the elements for immediate action. She  proposed that the technology transfer aspects of the three  proposals be integrated into a working document for discussion  in the working group. On Friday, 6 November, the contact group  on technology transfer continued discussions on the proposed  draft decision.

On Tuesday, 10 November, in SBSTA plenary, delegates considered  the draft conclusions on technology transfer  (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.11) requesting the SBSTA Chair to establish  a consultative process, which would consist of regional  workshops and meetings to implement FCCC Article 4.5 (technology  transfer). Parties were invited to provide submissions to the  Secretariat by 15 March 1999 in response to the issues listed in  the annex to the decision.

Delegates adopted most of the text unchanged, modifying the  preamble to reflect the role of the private sector in some  countries. A paragraph requesting SBSTA to establish a  consultative process to consider the issues listed in the annex  engendered debate. The G-77/CHINA favored retaining reference to  a TTM. The group also said the paragraph should be considered in  conjunction with a bracketed reference in the annex, which  required consideration of appropriate mechanisms for technology  transfer with the FCCC. The PHILIPPINES suggested that a body  was needed to operationalize the process, adding that experts  involved in the consultative process should be from the FCCC  roster of experts. The US, with the EU, said the aim of the  consultative process should be 'meaningful and effective  action.' The G-77/CHINA indicated willingness to accept  'meaningful and effective action' if brackets were removed from  the annex.

The Chair closed the formal meeting and began informal  discussions. The EU said the annex was not a negotiated text and  supported the US proposal to leave the debate to the high-level  segment, as it related to other issues under negotiation. The  Chair proposed compromise wording. After some debate, the Chair  invited the EU, the US and the G-77/China to discuss the issue  informally.

SBSTA reconvened at approximately 12:30 am. Chair Chow reported  that participants in the afternoon's consultations had agreed to  let the Chair make a proposal. He proposed the following: 'to  achieve agreement on a framework for meaningful and effective  actions.' The reference to 'technology transfer mechanism' would  be deleted. The text would also have SBSTA draw from the roster  of experts. A bracketed reference in the annex asked whether  existing multilateral mechanisms were sufficient.

The Chair attempted to accept the text for forwarding to the  COP, but the US objected. SBSTA accepted the text, and the Chair  said the record would note the US objection. The US, supported  by JAPAN, said the action was inappropriate and a statement in  the record was insufficient. He said the record should indicate  that the decision was accepted in the face of objection.

In final plenary, delegates adopted the decision on development  and transfer of technology (FCCC/CP/1998/L.16). The decision  requests SBSTA to establish a consultative process to consider  the preliminary list of issues and questions and make  recommendations on how they should be addressed in order to  achieve agreement on a framework for meaningful and effective  action to enhance technology transfer implementation under the  Convention.

Report of the session: On Tuesday, 10 November, SBSTA adopted  its draft report for the ninth session (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/L.8).  The final report will include the RUSSIAN FEDERATION's objection  to procedural steps embodied in the recommendation on the  relationship between the Montreal Protocol and the FCCC  (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.8).

# SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION

SBI, chaired by Bakary Kante (Senegal), met eight times,  including several joint sessions with SBSTA. SBI considered:  implementation of FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9; review of  information/possible decisions under Decision 9/CP.1; second  national communications from Annex I Parties; national  communications from Non-Annex I countries; financial mechanism;  administrative and financial matters; and schedule of meetings  for 2000-2001. Several contact groups met to further discuss  issues and draft conclusions. For many issues, delegates could  not reach agreement in the contact groups and the draft  decisions were forwarded to the COP with brackets. Outstanding  issues were then discussed behind closed doors in high-level  consultations and the decisions were presented in final plenary.

### IMPLEMENTATION OF FCCC ARTICLES 4.8 AND 4.9

On Tuesday, 3  November, Chair Kante convened a contact group, co-chaired by Bo  Kjellén (Sweden) and Mohammad Salamat (Iran), on Articles 4.8  and 4.9 (adverse effects) and the related articles of the Kyoto  Protocol (2.3 and 3.14). SAUDI ARABIA stressed the need for the  contact group to produce an unambiguous text that could be  adopted by the COP. The US and CANADA indicated that the issues  raised by Articles 4.8 and 4.9 and the subsequent decisions  should be separate. With AUSTRALIA, they said the issue should  be considered in a non-political manner.

The contact group met three times. In the first session,  delegates discussed how to proceed. In the second and third  sessions, they discussed a Co-Chairs' draft decision, which  stated that the basic elements for further analysis should  include: the identification of adverse effects; determination of  the impacts of implementation measures in developing countries;  the identification of the specific needs and concerns of  developing country Parties arising from such adverse effects and  impacts; and determining further necessary actions related to  funding, insurance and technology transfer to meet the needs of  developing countries. A programme of work was proposed that  included: an expert workshop (April 1999); further discussion in  subsidiary bodies (SBSTA-10 and SBI-10, June 1999);  identification of needs for further information needed (COP-5,  October 1999); and decisions made (COP-6, October 2000).

On Tuesday, 10 November, in describing the results of the  contact group, Co-Chair Kjellén said the text reflected the  objectives and there was general agreement on outstanding  issues. The two bracketed paragraphs in the preamble reflected  the lack of time for full negotiation. The G-77/CHINA said there  were compromises even in the unbracketed text. He said the group  would accept the document, including the brackets, to preserve  momentum. The US, with the EU, said the impression of general  agreement was misleading. He said the contact group did not  discuss this text and there was no agreement on the work plan.  SAUDI ARABIA stated there was no consensus and suggested that if  the whole text were bracketed, then all texts should be  bracketed.

The draft decision on FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9 was adopted with  two amendments and the removal of brackets from around the  entire text (FCCC/CP/1998/L.9). Paragraph 4 in the preamble was  expanded to read, 'Recognizing that in the implementation of the  commitments in Article 4 of the Convention, the Parties shall  give full consideration to what actions are necessary under the  Convention, including actions related to funding, insurance and  the transfer of technology, to meet the specific needs and  concerns of developing country Parties arising from the adverse  effects of climate change and/or the impact of the  implementation of response measures.' The following paragraph  was shortened and reads, 'Noting the provision under Article  12.8 of the Protocol.' Compared to the draft decision, the  adopted text includes an expanded comment on the  responsibilities of Annex I Parties under Articles 4.8 and 4.9,  but limits discussion of specific commitments under Article 12  of the Protocol. The decision focuses on obtaining and compiling  further information, continuing the analysis on adverse effects  and includes a work plan for future action.

Review of information/possible decisions under decision 9/CP.1:  On Wednesday, 4 November, delegates considered the review of  information and possible decisions under Article 4.2(f), which  addresses amendments to FCCC Annexes (FCCC/CP/1998/13;  FCCC/CP/1997/MISC.3). The Chair recalled that informal  consultations were held during the last two sessions, but no  consensus emerged. PAKISTAN requested Parties to delete Turkey  from Annexes I and II. The EU said all OECD countries should  have legally binding targets. Informal consultations were held  on this issue.

On Friday, 6 November in plenary, the President of the COP  invited comments on the draft decision on the review of  implementation of commitments and of other provisions of the  Convention (FCCC/CP/1998/L.2). Under the draft decision, the COP  would continue to the review this matter at COP-5. TURKEY  reiterated that its current status as was an anomaly that delays  its ratification of the Convention. PAKISTAN called for the  resolution of the issue to allow Turkey to participate in the  process.

Second national communications from Annex I Parties: On  Wednesday, 4 November, delegates discussed the full compilation  and synthesis of second national communications from Annex I  Parties. The Secretariat provided a review of documentation and  discussed gaps in data and reporting (FCCC/CP/1998/11;  FCCC/CP/1998/11/Add.1; FCCC/CP/1998/11/Add.2). The debate  included reference to the in-depth review process and the  proposal for an exercise of data comparison (FCCC/CP/1998/4;  FCCC/CP/1998/5; FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.8; FCCC/CP/1998/INF.9). The G-77/CHINA, with the PHILIPPINES and CHINA, expressed concern  about: increasing emission trends among Annex II Parties;  activities relating to financial resources and technology  transfer; the lack of progress in the development of policies  and measures; and gaps in reporting by Annex I Parties.

NORWAY, with the EU, AUSTRALIA, the US and CANADA, stated that:  the national communications and their reviews were important to  the Convention process; reporting issues and guidelines required  increased attention; and the Secretariat should conduct more  analytical work. The EU, NEW ZEALAND, the US, SWITZERLAND,  CANADA and NORWAY said the third national communication should  be due in 2001. The EU, NORWAY and the US supported the  Secretariat's proposed paper on comparison of activity data, but  sought clarification on several technical and procedural issues.

A contact group on national communications from Annex I Parties,  chaired by Mohamed Ould El Ghaouth (Mauritania) and Alexander  Metalnikov (Russian Federation), met over the weekend and  formulated a draft decision. It proposed that the third national  communications from Annex I Parties be due in 2001 and that  subsequent national communications be due every three to five  years. The decision included a statement on the need for further  efforts by Parties to improve completeness, consistency and  comparability of data and information, as well as participating,  through the SBI, in evaluating and refining the review process.  It proposed that the Secretariat complete a feasibility study on  the potential usefulness of data comparison and report on  information contained in annual national inventory submissions.

On Tuesday, 10 November, in SBI plenary, the Co-Chairs of the  contact group indicated that consensus was reached. The G-77/CHINA proposed bracketing a paragraph in the annex that noted  that many Annex I Parties would not reduce GHGs to 1990 levels.  They said this issue became linked to discussion on FCCC Article  4.2 (a) and (b) (adequacy of commitments). Contact group Co- Chair El Ghaouth asked the Chair not to reopen debate on an  agreed decision. The text was accepted with brackets.

The final plenary adopted the decision on national  communications from Annex I Parties with the removal of the  brackets from paragraph 10(c) (FCCC/CP/1998/L.10). The decision  requests Annex I Parties to submit their third national  communication by 30 November 2001 and subsequent communications  will be due at three- to five-year intervals.

National communications from non-Annex I countries: On Thursday,  5 November, delegates discussed national communications from  non-Annex I countries (FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.4; FCCC/CP/1998/INF.2;  FCCC/CP/1998/CRP.1). The PHILIPPINES highlighted the need for  capacity building and financing, which should follow the  guidelines for initial communications in Decision 10/CP.2.  CHINA, supported by TOGO and the CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC, said  the decision recognized the need for adequate and additional  financial resources for inventories, an enormous task for some  developing countries. CHILE and COLOMBIA described ongoing  efforts toward their initial national communications. URUGUAY  and the REPUBLIC OF KOREA described their initial communications  and national efforts underway to limit GHGs. The EU said  communications should be considered on a country-level basis and  more frequent workshops would be beneficial.

On Monday, 9 November, the contact group on non-Annex I national  communications, chaired by Paul Malcons (South Africa) and Dan  Reifsnyder (US), considered a draft Co-Chairs' text. Discussion  centered on a number of issues including: whether national  communications would be evaluated and whether there would be a  process of ongoing evaluation; whether a compilation and  synthesis of non-Annex I national communications would be  completed, and if so when; whether there would be in-country  reviews; and whether workshops would help the consideration  and/or preparation of national communications.

On Tuesday, 10 November, in SBI plenary, Co-Chair Malcons  presented the draft decision. The EU bracketed a paragraph  regarding requests to the Secretariat. The G-77/CHINA bracketed  the entire text. CHINA and SAUDI ARABIA said the Chair should  not allow further negotiation on the text. After lengthy debate,  the Chair called on delegates to respect the rules and said the  entire text would be bracketed for consideration by the COP  plenary.

The final COP plenary adopted the decision on initial national  communications from non-Annex I Parties with minor changes  (FCCC/CP/1998/L.11). Paragraph 5 was amended to read: 'decides  to continue to address the consideration of communications from  non-Annex I Parties, at its fifth session, with a view to taking  a further decision on this matter.' This change highlighted the  ongoing nature of the consideration of non-Annex I  communications. All of the brackets were removed and the  decision was adopted.

Financial Mechanism: On Wednesday, 4 November, delegates debated  the report of the Global Environment Facility (GEF)  (FCCC/CP/1998/12; FCCC/CP/1998/12/Add.1; FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.3)  and the financial mechanism and the review process  (FCCC/SBI/1998/MISC.4, FCCC/SBI/1998/MISC.4/Add.1 and  FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.3). Several developing country Parties  suggested a political reorientation of the GEF to meet their  needs, such as the preparation of non-Annex I communications.  Several developed country Parties suggested that the GEF should  operate as the Convention's financial entity, although  improvements were needed. Chair Kante called for unity among the  delegates to resolve the status of the GEF and appealed for a  solution.

On Thursday, 5 November, the contact group on the financial  mechanism, chaired by John Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda) and Dan  Reifsnyder (US), met briefly and focused on procedural matters  that would enable a decision to be reached. The G-77/CHINA,  after considering comments to their initial proposal presented  in the previous meeting, outlined two new proposals on the  substantive issues, namely, the status of and guidance to the  GEF. These documents were considered in a series of contact  group meetings over the next few days.

On Friday, 6 November, the contact group discussed a draft  decision presented by the G-77/China  (FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.3/Add.1). The US tabled a draft decision that  focused on: improvements at the operational level of the GEF;  resolving the status of and guidance to the GEF in one draft  decision; and GEF support programmes to assist developing  countries in altering their policy and legal frameworks in  support of technology transfer. The G-77/CHINA said this  proposal did not adequately meet the needs of developing country  Parties.

On Monday, 9 November, the contact group met in a closed session  and discussed a text proposed by the Co-Chairs. No decisions  were taken. Delegates indicated that they wanted feedback from  other contact groups, such as those on technology transfer and  FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9. Delegates linked the decision on the  status of the GEF with the discussion on guidance to the GEF.

Co-Chair Ashe presented the draft decision on the financial  mechanism to the SBI plenary later that day. The EU bracketed  paragraphs on GEF funding for implementing adaptation responses  and meeting full agreed costs. The US bracketed language on  international centers. The G-77/CHINA bracketed the entire text.  The text was forwarded to the COP with brackets.

After extensive consultations behind closed doors, the COP  plenary was presented with a draft decision (FCCC/CP/1998/L.22)  without brackets, which it adopted. It was agreed that the  restructured GEF shall serve as the financial mechanism. On  guidance to the GEF, the changes included: deletion of bracketed  text on the provision of new and additional funds for addressing  climate change; removal of brackets from paragraphs on funding  for adaptation measures and facilitation of access to  information; and removal of brackets and strengthening of text  on meeting agreed full costs for initial and subsequent national  communications.

Second review of the adequacy of FCCC Article 4.2 (a) and (b):  On Wednesday, 4 November, delegates considered the second review  of the adequacy of FCCC Article 4.2 (a) and (b) (FCCC/CP/1997/7;  FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.6; FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.6/Add.1). There was  consensus among Parties that the current commitments were  inadequate and a decision should be reached at COP-4. The G-77/CHINA said: the issue is important to the Convention; a clear  decision defining new commitments should be reached; and  developed countries were shirking their responsibilities in this  matter. Several developed countries indicated that resolution of  this issue was possible at COP-4, but a decision should be  forward-looking and create an enabling framework that could  include a broader range of commitments. A contact group was  established to consider the issue.

On 5 November, the contact group considering the review of  Article 4.2 (a) and (b), chaired by Jennifer Irish (Canada) and  Margaret Mukahanana (Zimbabwe) remained focused on establishing  the approach to preparing a draft statement which, according to  FCCC Article 4.2 (d), must be completed by 31 December 1998.  Developing country Parties insisted that a G-77/CHINA draft  decision provide the basis for the deliberations. Other  countries stated that a document, which compiled a range of  submissions to the Secretariat following the June subsidiary  body meetings, should serve as the core text for discussions.

The group met over the weekend. A discussion of four draft  proposals, presented by AUSTRALIA, the EU, the G-77/CHINA and  the US, dominated the deliberations. Debate concerned procedural  issues on how to address the texts, with the G-77/CHINA  indicating reluctance to consider a compilation text prepared by  the Co-Chairs. After extensive debate, the G-77/CHINA proposed,  with the EU and NEW ZEALAND, a reworked text as a negotiating  document. The US, with the eventual support of G-77/CHINA,  rejected the compilation document and called on the four draft  decisions to be presented in their entirety to the SBI. The  Parties justified the cautious approach, citing this issue's  crucial importance to national positions. CHINA said he  interpreted the US and AUSTRALIA proposals as an attempt to  exact commitments from developing countries. The US and  AUSTRALIA noted that the scientific and technical evaluation  from the IPCC indicated that developed country actions would be  insufficient to meet the aims of the Convention, and the US  incorporated this into its submission. The meeting ended without  clear resolution.

On Tuesday, 10 November, Co-Chair Jennifer Irish reported to the  SBI plenary that the group agreed that commitments were  inadequate, but did not agree on reasons nor on actions  required. She presented a recommendation that the Chair conduct  further consultations. Co-Chair Margaret Mukahanana said the  difficulty on reaching a consensus was based on different  interpretations of adequacy of commitments. The Chair asked  delegates to forward the five draft decisions to the COP  plenary.

During the final plenary, the President reported that no  conclusion was possible on the second review of adequacy of  Article 4.2(a) and (b). There was no discussion or decision on  this issue by the COP and the nature of future discussions on  this issue were not described.

Administrative and Financial Matters: On Tuesday, 3 November,  the Secretariat outlined a number of administrative and  financial matters (FCCC/CP/1998/8/Add.1; FCCC/CP/1998/9;  FCCC/CP/1998/10 and FCCC/CP/1998/INF.1). A brief discussion  ensued and the Chair decided to hold consultations on the issues  raised.

On Tuesday, 10 November, the budget group Chair Harald Dovland  (Norway) reported that no agreement had been reached on the  calendar of meetings. The US highlighted concerns regarding  dates in the draft decision. The text was adopted with the  exclusion of the calendar of meetings. The Executive Secretary  reported that since document FCCC/SBI/1998/INF.6 was  distributed, financial contributions had been received from  several Parties. Delegates adopted a decision on this issue in  final plenary (FCCC/CP/1998/L.13).

Schedule of meetings for 2000-2001: On Tuesday, 3 November, in  the SBI plenary, the EU, supported by CANADA and AUSTRALIA,  proposed that COP-5 be held in 2000 rather than 1999. With SAUDI  ARABIA, CHINA, VENEZUELA and NIGERIA, MAURITANIA objected to  this proposal. If the COP is postponed, he said governments  might not feel the pressure to ratify the Protocol. CHINA noted  that several issues under the Convention remained unresolved and  time was needed to prepare for the Protocol's entry into force.  NIGERIA objected to the US proposal for alternating ministerial  and non-ministerial COPs. CANADA called for consultations on  this issue under the guidance of the Chair. Informal  consultations were held.

On Monday, 9 November, SBI adopted the draft report of its ninth  session (FCCC/SBI/1998/L.8).

# SBI/SBSTA JOINT SESSIONS

## Flexibility Mechanisms

In a joint SBI/SBSTA plenary on  Wednesday, 4 November, delegates discussed the Protocol's  flexibility mechanisms contained in Article 6 (emission  reduction units), Article 12 (clean development mechanism) and  Article 17 (emissions trading)(FCCC/1998/CP/MISC.7 and Add.1;  FCCC/SBSTA/1998/6; FCCC/CP/1998/INF.3). The G-77/CHINA  reiterated the need for the flexibility mechanisms to proceed  step-by-step. BRAZIL said the CDM should not be operational  before ratification of the Protocol and implementation of  domestic measures. AOSIS stated, inter alia, that the concept of  supplementarity should guide the mechanisms.

The AFRICAN GROUP stressed that the use of flexible mechanisms  be limited to an agreed amount since the primary objective of  the FCCC was to encourage domestic action. Appropriate work with  debt relief in Africa would create an enabling environment for a  wide range of CDM projects. He called for a preparatory process  to enable African countries to undertake CDM projects. He  stressed the importance of equity in the CDM and suggested  focusing on infrastructure development in the continent.

The EU stated that the mechanisms should be developed parallel  to and consistent with each other. He said domestic actions  should be the primary means of emissions reductions and the  mechanisms should be supplemental. He called for the definition  of a quantitative and qualitative ceiling based on equitable  terms. SWITZERLAND suggested the creation of a compliance  mechanism. The EU, SWITZERLAND and SLOVENIA said COP-4 should  agree on as many principles as possible and adopt detailed  schedules to implement the Kyoto Protocol.

AUSTRALIA said the flexibility mechanisms were to be open,  market-based, transparent, cost effective and equitable; provide  comprehensive coverage, including sinks; and be fungible. With  NEW ZEALAND, she opposed restrictions on trade in assigned  amounts, characterizing them as inequitable, costly, arbitrary  and difficult to implement.

With CANADA, the US and NORWAY, JAPAN underscored the importance  of addressing the flexibility mechanisms in parallel, reaching  early agreement and developing a work plan for unresolved  issues. He favored giving priority to technical issues.  Supported by CANADA and the US, he opposed quantitative ceilings  for reductions achieved through the flexibility mechanisms,  noting that there was no ceiling on transfers of assigned  amounts under Protocol Article 4 ('bubble'). On the CDM, he  favored: transparency; inclusion of sink projects; private  sector involvement; use of public funds to ensure equitable  geographical distribution of projects; and a standardized and/or  project-by-project approach for baselines. With CANADA, he said  host countries should determine sustainable development  criteria.

A joint SBI/SBSTA contact group, chaired by Luiz Gylvan Meira  Filho (Brazil) and Yvo de Boer (Netherlands), met several times.  On Wednesday, 4 November, the group discussed the preparation of  a comprehensive work programme on flexibility mechanisms. The EU  and a group of Annex I Parties, including Australia, Canada,  Iceland, New Zealand, Norway, the Russian Federation and the US  ('Umbrella Group') distributed draft decisions and discussion  documents. Other Parties, including the G-77/CHINA, called for  more time to consider the volume of documentation. Several  developing country Parties supported addressing a wider range of  issues related to the flexibility mechanisms, including  technology transfer, adverse impacts, methodologies, reporting  and compliance. Two small island States supported a package of  11 themes for the work programme. The Co-Chairs distributed a  'dummy' Draft Work Programme on Mechanisms and conducted  informal consultations.

On Friday, 6 November, the G-77/CHINA stressed the need for a  clear section in the work programme devoted to the nature and  scope of the mechanisms to facilitate comparison. He added that  the mechanisms should not exacerbate the economic disadvantage  of countries and called for the CDM to be discussed on a  priority basis. HONDURAS, supported by several Latin American  countries, called for expeditious creation of the CDM, and  proposed an 'interim phase approach' to develop guidelines and  rules. The US stressed parallel progress on all mechanisms. The  EU preferred a general, rather than a detailed, debate. NEW  ZEALAND stressed the importance of developing a timeline for  discussion. Several Parties expressed concern about the length  of the draft work programme. SWITZERLAND provided the Co-Chairs  with a two-page work programme. The contact group met on  Saturday to continue discussion on the work programme, with a  much-shortened version prepared by the Co-Chairs that included  the Honduran 'interim phase' proposal. After some discussion,  the Chairs acknowledged differences in views among the Parties,  but said the views were not incompatible.

On Monday, 9 November, the G-77/CHINA submitted a proposed work  programme containing an extensive list of issues, embodying a  'step-by-step' approach and prioritizing the CDM. In response,  the US, supported by CANADA and AUSTRALIA, suggested the contact  group address four questions: what type of decision should be  made, when, by whom, and how it should move forward. He added  that there were two options: negotiate the items in the text or  keep the list of items open. The EU said the G-77/China draft  programme lacked, inter alia, a clear timeline, deadlines and  allocation of work to different bodies. They rejected the  prioritization of work, calling for parallel development of all  three mechanisms. The Co-Chairs introduced a draft decision on  mechanisms, taking into consideration the views expressed in the  group, admitting that it was outside their mandate. AUSTRALIA  said the issues settled at Kyoto should not be re-opened.

On Tuesday, 10 November, draft work programmes were submitted by  AUSTRALIA (on behalf of CANADA, ICELAND, NEW ZEALAND, NORWAY,  the RUSSIAN FEDERATION and the US), JAPAN, SWITZERLAND and the  Co-Chairs. After extensive deliberations, Co-Chair de Boer  suggested that the title of the work programme include a  footnote stating 'the existence of elements in this list is  without prejudice to inclusion of these items in the rules,  modalities and guidelines developed for these mechanisms.' The  discussion on principles would be limited to the 'application of  existing principles' and the references to FCCC Articles 4.8 and  4.9 (adverse effects) would be deleted. At the request of G-77/CHINA, the Parties reconvened later to discuss the draft as  amended by the Co-Chairs. SAUDI ARABIA, with QATAR, said it  would support the Co-Chairs' amended text, if FCCC Articles 4.8  and 4.9 (adverse impacts) were included. UGANDA said all the  references to FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9 should be deleted, since  they were under deliberation elsewhere.

Delegates convened a joint SBI/SBSTA plenary in the early  morning hours of Wednesday, 11 November. The contact group Co- Chairs reported that there was no agreement on a draft work  programme. AUSTRALIA and other Annex I Parties, as well as the  EU, put forward the documents they had produced for the contact  group. The SBI/SBSTA Co-Chairs distributed their own draft  decision on the work programme on mechanisms. The G-77/CHINA  urged discussion of the contact group Co-Chairs' draft, with  CHINA opposing the use of other documents. SOUTH AFRICA and  UGANDA rejected the G-77/CHINA position, saying they were  unaware the group had discussed the new proposal. With the US,  EU, CANADA, JAPAN, KUWAIT and AUSTRALIA, the AFRICAN GROUP  favored bracketing the new Co-Chairs' draft entirely. VENEZUELA  said forwarding the Co-Chairs' text would require formulation of  a joint subsidiary bodies' position. KUWAIT suggested the draft  decision of the SBSTA/SBI Co-Chairs be forwarded to the COP as a  Chair's text. Co-Chair Kante suggested forwarding both texts to  the plenary: the draft work plan proposed by the contact group  Co-Chairs and the draft decision proposed by the SBSTA/SBI Co- Chairs. Delegates agreed, but it remained uncertain which of the  texts would be bracketed. The session concluded at 4:10 am.

Later that day, SBI/SBSTA Co-Chair Chow informed the COP plenary  that a decision had been reached on the flexibility mechanisms  and two draft texts would be forwarded to the COP  (FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.7 and Add.1).

During the final plenary on Saturday, 14 November, the COP  adopted a decision that included a work programme on mechanisms  (FCCC/CP/1998/L.21). The decision contained several elements,  inter alia: prioritization of the CDM; a final decision on  Protocol Articles 6 (emission reduction units), 12 (clean  development mechanism) and 17 (emissions trading) at COP-6; and  a request to the Secretariat to prepare a plan for facilitating  capacity building for developing country Parties, especially for  the small island States and the least developed countries, to  participate in the CDM.

The work programme contained a list of issues to be discussed  under four categories: General; CDM; Article 6 projects; and  Article 17 - emissions trading between Parties included in Annex  B. In the general section, elements included: application of  relevant principles; capacity building; adaptation; compliance;  inapplicability of Article 4.8 and 4.9 of the Convention and/or  Article 2.3 and 3.14 of the Kyoto Protocol to the mechanisms;  application of any quantification of 'supplemental to domestic  actions' to each State within a regional economic integration  organization; and linkages, inter alia, interchangeability. In  the section on the CDM, reference was made to transparency, non- discrimination and prevention of distortion of competition;  supplementarity to domestic actions for achieving compliance  with reduction commitments under Protocol Article 3 (concrete  ceiling defined in quantitative and qualitative terms based on  equitable criteria; fungibility among mechanisms; inclusion of  sink projects; and credit (starting from 2000) for qualifying  projects begun before CDM rules become effective. Under Article  6 and Article 17, the elements to be discussed include: lack of  authority to elaborate 'supplemental to domestic actions' and  the inadvisability of doing so; and lack of authority to  establish a charge for adaptation. On Article 17 references were  made to the basis for and determination of rights and  entitlements for emissions trading of Parties included in Annex  B; hot air; interchangeability and assigned amounts as a basis  for emissions trading.

Activities Implemented Jointly: On Tuesday, 3 November, a joint  SBI/SBSTA plenary session considered the status of the AIJ pilot  phase. The Secretariat provided a report on the 95 projects, the  main methodological issues, and subjects that arose in workshops  on this topic (FCCC/CP/1998/2, FCCC/CP/1998/INF.3,  FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.7 and FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.7/Add.1).

The G-77/CHINA, supported by several developing countries,  observed that AIJ is separate from the mechanisms arising from  the Protocol. He said while the number of projects had  increased, representation was poor. He stated that there were  insufficient details to draw conclusions and the pilot phase  should be extended. Most non-Annex I Parties have not  experienced and evaluated an AIJ project within their own  country. Several Parties observed that further experience and  capacity building would lay the groundwork for Protocol  mechanisms.

SWITZERLAND, with NORWAY, JAPAN, SLOVENIA, the EU, the US,  AUSTRALIA and COLOMBIA, contended that the AIJ pilot phase  provides lessons for the flexibility mechanisms. A review of the  AIJ pilot phase for COP-5 would support the development of this  work. POLAND observed that a review of the process could explain  why some countries were excluded and resolve some of the  concerns of the G-77/CHINA.

Cornelia Quennet-Thielen (Germany) chaired informal  consultations on the issue and presented a draft decision  (FCCC/SB/1998/CRP.3) in a joint SBI/SBSTA plenary on Tuesday, 10  November. The G-77/CHINA opposed text on crediting for AIJ pilot  phase projects and proposed an amendment on continuing the AIJ  pilot phase, focusing on developing countries. The US and  SLOVENIA opposed the change, noting it excluded certain groups  of Parties. AUSTRALIA said incentives were needed for the  private sector. The draft decision was forwarded to the COP  plenary.

During the final plenary, the draft decision on AIJ was adopted  without discussion (FCCC/CP/1998/L.20). The decision continues  the AIJ pilot phase, invites Parties to make submissions on  projects and begins a process of review to enable a decision to  be made by the end of the present decade.

Preparations for COP/MOP-1: On Thursday, 5 November, the SBI and  SBSTA discussed preparations for the first session of the  Conference of Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to  the Protocol (COP/MOP-1). The Chairs introduced their draft  decision (FCCC/CP/1998/3) and invited comment. SAUDI ARABIA said  preparations were needed for all Protocol articles, not just the  flexibility mechanisms. He stressed that Protocol Articles 3.14  and 2.3 (adverse effects) had not been adequately addressed. He  suggested convening a separate contact group, discussing the  issues in the contact group on FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9 or in  the one on flexibility mechanisms. VENEZUELA, BANGLADESH, the  UNITED ARAB EMIRATES, IRAN, SYRIA, KUWAIT, LEBANON, NIGERIA, THE  GAMBIA, ECUADOR, ALGERIA, MOROCCO and INDONESIA supported SAUDI  ARABIA.

SWITZERLAND supported the draft decision, but suggested  amendments to the timeframe and scope of work. The US proposed  amending the decision to reflect the differing legal status of  the Convention and the Protocol. The EU, supported by MONACO,  noted the need to specify ways to facilitate cooperation and  stressed coordination of IPCC and FCCC activities through a  joint working group. He proposed establishing a compliance  mechanism and scheduling a meeting for early 1999. JAPAN noted  the need for time for consultation and difficulties in combining  ongoing work under the FCCC and the Protocol. He opposed  deadlines for setting compliance procedures until the mechanisms  were elaborated. CANADA called for a balance between the  Convention and the Protocol and said Protocol issues needed  attention to expedite ratification.

The Chair said Protocol Articles 2.3 and 3.14 were within the  scope of work of the contact group on FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9  (adverse impacts). The contact group would determine its own  agenda. KUWAIT, NIGERIA and SAUDI ARABIA sought a clear mandate  for the contact group to consider Articles 2.3 and 3.14. The US,  JAPAN and AUSTRALIA said Decision 3/CP.3, which specified the  mandate of the contact group, did not require specific  consideration of Articles 2.3 and 3.14. The EU said the issue  merited discussion, but it was unnecessary to highlight specific  articles.

The Chair said no separate contact groups would be established.  SAUDI ARABIA called for a work plan and timeline on Article 3.14  for COP/MOP 1, and said progress on Article 3.14 should follow  an approach similar to Protocol Articles 6, 12 and 17  (flexibility mechanisms). The Chair indicated that no work plan  or timetable for any of the articles in question would be  developed, but these items would be explored because they are  linked.

Espen Rønneberg (Marshall Islands) chaired informal  consultations and reported on Tuesday, 10 November, that no  progress was made due to time constraints. He offered an  informal paper with an annex containing an initial list of work.  Co-Chair Chow suggested further deliberations. SAUDI ARABIA said  he would accept this on the condition that the issue of Protocol  Articles 4.8 and 4.9 (adverse effects) be resolved at COP-4. The  Co-Chairs forwarded the paper to the COP.

MAURITANIA and the Co-Chairs proposed a draft decision urging  Parties to sign and ratify the Kyoto Protocol. JAPAN recalled  that the draft decision on Article 4.2(a) and (b) contained a  bracketed sentence urging Parties to ratify. The US said it was  not in a position to urge ratification and suggested postponing  the decision. The draft decision was forwarded to the COP.

The draft decision on the preparations for COP/MOP-1 was  accepted with two minor changes to the annexes  (FCCC/CP/1998/L.19). The decision focuses on a work plan that  includes allocation of preparatory work between the subsidiary  bodies and a list of tasks assigned to Conference of the Parties  serving as the Meeting of the Parties.

# PRESIDENTIAL CEREMONY

The Presidential Ceremony was held on Wednesday, 11 November. On  behalf of UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan, Nitin Desai, Under- Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs, said the  Kyoto Protocol offered a sustainable path for industrialized  countries and demonstrated shared stewardship for the planet. He  underscored the need for early ratification of the Protocol and  action on issues including technology transfer, domestic  measures and scientific research. He called for a new deadline  to maintain momentum and pledged UN support.

Carlos Menem, President of Argentina, said the Protocol had been  approved by the Senate of Argentina and was under consideration  in the lower house. He emphasized a clean growth strategy. At  COP-5, Argentina will make a commitment to lower emissions for  the period 2008 to 2012. Countries were to be permitted, he  said, 'to find a new way under the Convention.' Delegates heard reports from the Chairs of SBI and SBSTA on  decisions adopted and outstanding issues. The COP-4 President  proposed to convene a group of 'friends of the president' at the  ministerial level to address the outstanding issues from the SBI  and SBSTA. Executive Secretary Michael Zammit Cutajar informed  delegates that Jordan had offered to host COP-5. He said a final  decision had not been reached because financial matters were  under discussion.

TURKEY said it had presented the FCCC to Parliament for  ratification. However, its Annex I and II status did not conform  to the country's economic circumstances. She requested  resolution of this issue at COP-5. LIBYA expressed hope that the  international community would prevent adverse economic impacts  from response measures. Sanctions that violate international  agreements have impeded environmental improvements to oil  production facilities.

Delegates heard statements from the following intergovernmental  organizations: the World Meteorological Organization; the United  Nations Industrial Development Organization; the United Nations  Development Programme; the United Nations Environment Programme;  Parlamento Latinoamericano; the World Bank; UNESCO; IPCC; the  Latin American Energy Organization; OECD; and the International  Energy Agency.

Non-governmental organizations (NGOs) addressing the COP were:  Foro del Buen Ayre; Global Legislators Organization for a  Balanced Environment; the International Confederation of Free  Trade Unions; the International Chamber of Commerce; the World  Business Council for Sustainable Development; the International  Council for Local Environmental Initiatives; the Argentine  Mayors' Environmental Forum; Klima-Bündnis (Climate Alliance);  Climate Action Network - Latin America; IUCN; the Business  Council for Sustainable Energy; the European Business Council  for a Sustainable Energy Future; Climate Network - Europe; and  Franciscans International.

High-level Segment The High-Level Segment was held on Thursday, 12 November. The  ministers presented overviews of domestic actions on climate  change and called for enhanced progress at the COP to ensure  ratification of the Kyoto Protocol. They expressed their  sympathy for the victims of Hurricane Mitch. FRANCE announced  the cancellation of Honduras' and Nicaragua's debt.

Argentine President Carlos Menem said that at COP-5 Argentina  will make a commitment to lower emissions for the period 2008 to  2012. Countries were to be permitted, he said, 'to find a new  way under the Convention.' KAZAKSTAN expressed willingness to  undertake obligations and enter into Annex B of the Kyoto  Protocol through Annex I of the FCCC. NEW ZEALAND, the RUSSIAN  FEDERATION and the US supported the Argentine voluntary  commitment. With the US and HUNGARY, AUSTRALIA called for  meaningful participation and future voluntary commitments  appropriate to individual circumstances and with QATAR, NORWAY,  PERU and SENEGAL stressed the principle of common but  differentiated responsibilities.

AOSIS noted the inadequacy of the commitments and efforts to  implement them under the Protocol and the FCCC. He said the  Argentine voluntary commitment must not be allowed to detract  from the commitments of Parties in the Protocol. CUBA, QATAR and  SAUDI ARABIA opposed any attempt to compel developing countries  to take on 'voluntary commitments.' The REPUBLIC OF KOREA  recognized that voluntary commitments was a sensitive issue, but  there would be a need for global participation over time.  BOLIVIA stressed that substantive participation of non-Annex I  Parties should be based on the principle of sovereignty and  right to self-determination and that their emissions limits  cannot constitute a precedent nor commit others to emissions  limitation targets. MALAYSIA expressed regret over the continued  discussion on voluntary commitments. ETHIOPIA said pressure for  voluntary commitments would undermine the FCCC process.

The US, THAILAND, PERU and TUVALU announced their signature to  the Kyoto Protocol. TRINIDAD and TOBAGO, on behalf of CARICOM  and HAITI, said BAHAMAS will sign the Protocol this week.  MICRONESIA, ITALY, CHILE, LITHUANIA, CYPRUS and the SOLOMON  ISLANDS stated that they were in the process of ratifying the  Protocol. JAPAN and SLOVENIA called for the early signing and  ratification of the Protocol. KAZAKSTAN expressed willingness to  undertake obligations and enter into Annex B of the Kyoto  Protocol through Annex I of the FCCC.

A number of speakers, including the EU, THE GAMBIA, JAPAN,  SWEDEN, SYRIA, CROATIA, NEW ZEALAND, RUSSIAN FEDERATION, EGYPT,  NEPAL, SPAIN, GHANA and the G-77/CHINA, stressed that: active  leadership to prevent global warming must come from developed  country Parties; domestic action must provide the main means for  meeting commitments to combat climate change; and flexibility  mechanisms were supplemental and their use must be subject to  strict rules of accountability and compliance. PERU said the  inaction of developed countries sends dangerous signals to non- Annex I countries. NORWAY said developed countries must accept  even more ambitious targets in the future. Recognizing the  vulnerability of small island States, NEW ZEALAND called for  support to AOSIS.

FRANCE noted that developing country emissions are increasing  and called for timely provision of financial support and  technology transfer. With ECUADOR, FINLAND, the CARICOM States,  THE GAMBIA, VENEZUELA, CHINA, ECUADOR, BENIN, TANZANIA and  UGANDA, he highlighted the need for additional financial  support, sustained transfer of information and technology,  capacity building and institutional strengthening. SUDAN  stressed technology transfer irrespective of political relations  or racial considerations. NORWAY recognized the role of industry  in technology transfer. The NETHERLANDS highlighted the need for  increased financial flows to the most vulnerable countries.

The UK and GHANA said scientific uncertainty should not be used  as an excuse for inaction. DENMARK called for a Buenos Aires  deal that calls upon developed countries to commit themselves to  provide additional funds to developing countries and address  their obligations under the FCCC and the Protocol. In return,  developing countries must agree to work out the necessary  national strategies to allow for a constructive review process.  AOSIS called for a clear and ambitious timetable to elaborate  the Protocol. The G-77/CHINA said their participation in  mitigating climate change depends on the effective  implementation of developed country Party commitments in the  field of technology transfer and financial resources. JAPAN and  the EU stressed the need to maintain the momentum of Kyoto, and  with FINLAND, called for the creation of a clear and efficient  work plan giving priority to developing country concerns. LATVIA  supported the EU proposal for a Buenos Aires work plan.

GHANA said the challenges of climate change mitigation and  adaptation present an additional burden to developing countries  and with the CARICOM States, ICELAND, AUSTRALIA, the US, SAUDI  ARABIA, NEW ZEALAND and the G-77/CHINA, called for elaboration  of mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol. The CENTRAL AMERICAN  STATES stressed the importance of sinks and supported the G-77/China proposal to prioritize the CDM and operationalize it by  1 January 2000. With CHILE, he proposed an interim phase of the  CDM. IRELAND supported the EU call for clear qualitative and  quantitative ceilings on the use of the flexibility mechanisms.  The COOK ISLANDS, MARSHALL ISLANDS, NAURU, NIUE, TUVALU, ALGERIA  and the CARICOM States expressed concern that the flexibility  mechanisms are a way of avoiding domestic responsibility.  THAILAND said the CDM should not be the sole means of technology  transfer.

The SEYCHELLES expressed concern that vulnerable nations that  are insignificant on the global stage may be excluded from  programmes such as those under the flexibility mechanisms.  THAILAND supported North-South and South-South partnerships  based on equity and the principle of common but differentiated  responsibility. SPAIN called for progress on developing a  process of technology transfer and efforts to address the issue  of public awareness and education. FRANCE called for a common  approach to collective measures and said mechanisms should be  based on a reliable system of compliance that includes  sanctions. CROATIA said the flexibility mechanisms must be  equitable, i.e., open, transparent, verifiable and non- discriminatory. EGYPT emphasized the equal treatment of the  three flexibility mechanisms and suggested that part of the  proceeds from these mechanisms be mobilized to finance the  transfer of adaptation technology for developing countries.  BRAZIL underscored the CDM as a means of inducing new and mostly  private investment, and suggested that it be project-based and  include all countries. CANADA described the CDM as a 'win-win- win mechanism,' i.e., win for the environment, win for  sustainable development and win for the developed countries, as  they would be able to meet the Kyoto Protocol targets. VENEZUELA  said CDM projects must ensure net contribution to sustainable  development in the host country, avoid hidden costs, and use  project-based rather than sectoral or national baselines to  avoid future imposition of targets.

ARGENTINA said emissions trading was an innovative solution to  market failure. POLAND called for final decisions on the  mechanisms at COP-5 and proposed a pilot phase for emissions  trading. The REPUBLIC OF KOREA opposed any limits on the CDM.  MEXICO stressed open criteria and a progressive approach to the  CDM that could foster immediate and simple actions without  artificial limits, not contained in the Protocol. BOTSWANA  emphasized the role of the CDM in assisting developing countries  and urged progress on elaborating this mechanism. MOROCCO said  the imbalance of projects under the AIJ pilot phase was  inequitable and ZIMBABWE recommended its extension. MALAYSIA  called for the incorporation of technology transfer and the  financial mechanism into the Protocol mechanisms.

GREECE supported agreement on clear principles, modalities,  rules and guidelines for the flexibility mechanisms, including  ceilings on their use. SOUTH AFRICA supported development of a  clear programme of work, establishment of an intersessional  working group and a timeframe to ensure the Kyoto targets are  met. UKRAINE stressed establishment of a work programme for  implementation of Kyoto obligations by Annex I Parties. He said  revival in transition economies will lead to inevitable  increases in GHG emissions, but these countries will achieve  internal reductions. He opposed the 'revision' of decisions  taken at Kyoto.

Several Parties, including DENMARK, VENEZUELA, POLAND,  AUSTRALIA, FRANCE, the EU and the US, called for the  establishment of a coherent, effective and strong compliance  system. The G-77/CHINA called for a decision on compliance at  COP-4. GERMANY suggested a ceiling for mechanisms and, with  FRANCE, supported the inclusion of sanctions in the compliance  system.

The RUSSIAN FEDERATION opposed attempts to qualify its emissions  reductions as 'hot air,' since they compensate for emissions  increases of other countries, and have been paid for by a  decline in living standards. BRAZIL and KENYA called for further  discussions on the adverse impacts of climate change. Supported  by MEXICO, BHUTAN and ICELAND, COLOMBIA called attention to  sinks under the Protocol and underscored the elaboration of  methodologies. ICELAND underscored the proportional impact of  single projects on small economies.

With BENIN and ZIMBABWE, CHINA cautioned against the COP losing  focus on the Convention. He opposed the argument that a global  problem demands a global response and rejected emissions  reduction or limitation conditions. SWEDEN urged delegates to  work to increase awareness, understanding and support for change  and, with FINLAND, applauded the role of NGOs in the  environmental agenda. VENEZUELA cautioned against allowing  distractions from the main issues by discussing items not on the  COP-4 agenda. ECUADOR supported closer coordination with other  UN Conventions, particularly the Convention on Biological  Diversity. NEPAL stressed regional environmental cooperation and  opposed undue limits on energy consumption.

KENYA called for GEF support in facilitating the CDM and  implementing adaptation measures. THE GAMBIA called for  membership of the Multilateral Consultative Committee and  participation in the CDM on an equitable geographical basis.  SENEGAL said the debt burden was a serious hindrance to  sustainable development and the marginalization of Africa made  equity a particular concern. INDIA stressed the distinction  between luxury and survival emissions. ZAMBIA said climate  change programmes should be linked to poverty eradication.  Recognizing that the lack of multilateral financing constitutes  a major obstacle to implementing the Convention and noting the  slow and complex process to access GEF funds, DJIBOUTI supported  the establishment of an independent financial mechanism to  finance the CDM for poor countries.

BURUNDI underscored the need for improved access to  technological information and knowledge and capacity building,  especially for African delegates participating in the climate  change process. CÔTE D'IVOIRE stated that the CDM should not be  a substitute for official development assistance or support from  the GEF. SWITZERLAND called for coordination between various  international environmental agreements, particularly the  Montreal and Kyoto Protocols. PARAGUAY highlighted its interest  in the potential of the flexibility mechanisms.

# CLOSING PLENARY

The final plenary of COP-4, originally scheduled for 3:00 pm on  Friday, 13 November, did not begin until 6:00 am on Saturday, 14  November. In the interim hours, selected delegates retreated  into closed high-level negotiations, informal consultations,  regional meetings and 'friends of the President' sessions. Many  delegates remained in the plenary hall and corridors waiting for  indications of progress and commencement of the final plenary.

Once the plenary finally began, the COP-4 President called on  Parties to adopt a draft resolution expressing solidarity with  Central America in light of the recent tragedy  (FCCC/CP/1998/L.17). NICARAGUA thanked the Parties for their  support and noted that the region will require continued  support. President Alsogaray announced the receipt of national  communications from Armenia, Kazakstan and Indonesia and the  signature of the Kyoto Protocol by the US. The total number of  signatories currently stands at 60.

On the adoption of rules of procedure, she informed the meeting  that no progress had been made on the issue and the draft rules  (FCCC/CP/1996/2) will continue to apply as before. Regarding  election of officers, consultations held by the Chairs of the  subsidiary bodies with the regional groups resulted in the  nomination of the Central African Republic as Vice Chair of  SBSTA and Switzerland as Vice Chair of SBI, to be followed by  Iran.

JORDAN reconfirmed its offer to host COP-5 and said it had  already begun negotiations with the Secretariat on arrangements.  He requested the President to ask the Executive Secretary to  continue discussions with Jordan with a view to reaching a  decision by 11 December. The proposal was accepted.

Delegates adopted ten decisions on outstanding issues. They also  adopted a 'Plan of Action,' under which Parties declared their  determination to strengthen the implementation of the Convention  and prepare for the future entry into force of the Kyoto  Protocol. The Plan contains the Parties' resolution to  demonstrate substantial progress according to the timeframes  within the decisions on: the financial mechanism; the  development and transfer of technology; the implementation of  FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9, as well as Protocol Articles 2.3 and  3.14; AIJ; the mechanisms of the Kyoto Protocol; and the  preparation for COP/MOP-1 (FCCC/CP/1998/L.23). The President  indicated that the decision would convey a sense of coherence  and balance.

COP Rapporteur Maciej Sadowski (POLAND) introduced the report of  the COP (FCCC/CP/1998/L.6 and Add.1). It was adopted without  amendment.

SWITZERLAND commented on the process of reaching these  decisions. He said there was a significant lack of transparency  in the manner in which the extended Bureau was set up. He  remarked that although small working groups were necessary, the  process of delegation to the working groups should be  transparent and democratic. He stated there must have a clear  mandate from the plenary. He called upon the Bureau and the  Secretariat to draft a proposal to elaborate an open and  interactive mechanism for establishing working groups.

The FCCC Executive Secretary referred to the Swiss statement and  views expressed to him from environmental NGOs concerning the  style of negotiations. He indicated that he wanted the process  to be inclusive and promised to work on the issue. He also  stated that the COP produced a solid plan of action and firm  deadlines that will generate results over the next two years.  COP-4 came to a close at 6:54 am on Saturday, 14 November 1998.

# A BRIEF ANALYSIS OF COP-4 SOMETHING FOR EVERYONE IN BUENOS AIRES

Two distant, but intimately related, events during the Fourth  Conference of the Parties in Buenos Aires, resulting in the  Buenos Aires Plan of Action, will colour the memories of most  participants and observers. The first was the much anticipated  decision by the host country to break ranks with most of its  partners in the G-77/China and signal its willingness to  undertake a binding commitment at COP-5 to abate its greenhouse  gas emissions. The second event followed less than 24 hours  later in New York with the United States' signing of the Kyoto  Protocol. The moves in Buenos Aires and New York displayed all  the choreography of a well executed tango with their timely cues  and dramatic impact.

The United States and Argentina stole the show at a Conference  marked by an apparent lack of ambition from the outset, with its  focus on the production of a work plan to elaborate the  provisions of the Kyoto Protocol and pursue the implementation  of the UNFCCC. The key outcomes were determined during the final  day of informal negotiations overseen by the COP President,  Maria Julia Alsogaray, Secretary of Natural Resources and  Sustainable Development of Argentina. Most countries were  reduced to the role of onlookers sometimes locked out of  informal meetings, a situation which provoked a rebuke by a  Swiss delegation during the closing COP Plenary. Complaining  about the lack of transparency, the Swiss delegate asked the  Secretariat to ensure that there would be no repetition of the  lock-out at future meetings. Much of the negotiation conducted  before the arrival of ministers in the second week turned out to  be little more than a dress rehearsal for the political decision  making during the sometimes heated high-level exchanges. Some  suggested that the President, by failing to seek and accept  advice on issues, was ill prepared to cope with some of the  complex dynamics of negotiations within the UN system.

This analysis will confine itself to a brief survey of the  significance of the Argentina and US initiatives and an  assessment of how the debate on the work programme became and  was always destined to become more than an exercise in setting  important deadlines.

At the meeting of the subsidiary bodies in Bonn in June, the  Parties to the UNFCCC experienced a distinct loss of momentum as  they stumbled over debates about priorities for the COP-4  agenda. A number of key issues up for discussion generated  divergent views around their meaning and significance, not least  a debate on the treatment of UNFCCC Articles 4.2 (a) and (b) on  the review of the adequacy of commitments. Some of the  flattening in momentum was also attributed to Decision 1/CP.3  from COP-3, which failed to provide clear guidance on what  'must' be accomplished in Buenos Aires. Given this background it  was probable that the hopes of some NGOs and Parties that  substantive work would begin on elaborating principles for the  operation of the 'Kyoto Mechanisms' of the Protocol would be set  back.

it takes two to tango: The United States' decision to sign the  Kyoto Protocol after Argentina stepped out from the ranks of the  G-77/China to take on a binding commitment must be seen in the  context of one of the first debates of COP-4 - one that touched  on a fault line running through the entire UNFCCC since 1995  when the G-77/China was fractured by a decision to establish the  Berlin Mandate. As expected, despite overwhelming opposition at  the subsidiary bodies meetings and a pre-COP meeting, Argentina  placed an item on voluntary commitments for developing countries  on the provisional agenda. COP President Maria Julia Alsogaray  responded to G-77/China opposition by striking the item off the  agenda and suggesting that informal consultations between  interested countries proceed. It was later reported that such  discussions between Annex I and non-Annex I countries had taken  place. The United States led the support for informal  consultations.

With Argentine President Carlos Menem's announcement, during the  second week of the COP, that Argentina would undertake a  voluntary commitment to abate its GHG emissions at COP-5, the  host country took a further step towards meeting Washington's  requirements. At a press briefing Wednesday evening, Eizenstat  called President Menem's decision 'historic' and signaled that  Argentina's undertaking to assume a voluntary commitment at COP- 5 constituted the kind of 'meaningful participation' by a  developing country that is a precondition for US ratification of  the Protocol. Most significantly, perhaps, Eizenstat echoed  President Menem's view that 'new pathways' to allow developing  countries to become full partners will have to be found. One NGO  observer suggested Argentina's decision was the most significant  development on voluntary commitments because it opened up the  prospect of a new negotiation process to allow a developing  country to accept binding commitments. It is understood that  nobody, including the Argentine government, has worked out the  exact modalities or even the general framework for this  groundbreaking procedure.

The Argentine announcement immediately fed speculation about US  plans and within 24 hours the US signed the Kyoto Protocol in  New York. The significance of the timing is best observed in the  remarks of US Senator Chuck Hagel following the US decision. He  said: 'In signing the Kyoto Protocol, the President blatantly  contradicts the will of the US Senate. The Byrd-Hagel  Resolution, which passed 95-0 in the Senate last year, was very  clear and bipartisan. It explicitly stated that the United  States should not be a signatory to any protocol' that excludes  developing countries from legally binding commitments or that  causes serious harm to the US economy.' Arguably, President Bill  Clinton believes that the Argentine development has begun to  dismantle his opponents' argument that developing countries are  excluded from legally binding commitments. At the close of COP- 4, Stuart Eizenstat hinted that further announcements of  developing country commitments can be expected. When asked to  identify Parties who might assume voluntary commitments, he said  the small island States of Niue and Nauru had expressed interest  in a greater level of engagement with the climate change regime.  At the close of the COP, President Alsogaray reported that  countries from both Latin America and Africa had also expressed  interest in Argentina's approach.

The COP President's determination to facilitate informal  consultations on the issue of developing country commitments in  the face of stiff opposition from within her country group (G-77/China) demonstrated a single mindedness that attracted much  criticism. Argentina's ambition is linked, in part, to its  candidature for membership of the OECD and close links between  Presidents Menem and Clinton. In pre-Kyoto bilateral  negotiations, both men addressed Joint Implementation and  credits. As the host country and close US ally, Argentina was  perfectly situated to break from the ranks of the G-77/China and  both facilitate and accelerate an evolution in the UNFCCC  process, which has been paralleled by growing interest in the  developing world in the CDM.

One of the architects of the Kyoto Protocol has suggested that  the language of 'voluntary commitments' may not survive because  the terminology has become has become tainted by the contentious  debate between the Umbrella Group (Japan, US, Switzerland,  Canada, Australia, Norway and New Zealand (JUSSCANNZ) and  Russia) and the G-77/China over developing country commitments.  'Voluntary commitments' remains a source of profound and  polluting suspicion within the process. In much the same way as  the loaded language of 'flexible mechanisms' has given way to  the term, 'Kyoto Mechanisms,' observers believe that the term  'voluntary commitments' may disappear from the discourse of the  climate change regime to be re-cast in more acceptable language.  Some countries, such as Indonesia and the Republic of Korea,  displayed more willingness to contemplate new commitments before  the United States and JUSSCANNZ transformed the issue into a  cause celebre.

Great expectations: There was an expectation in some quarters  that COP-4 would be a relatively straightforward, business-like  meeting where some of the principal decisions would be no more  contentious than setting tight deadlines for a work programme,  notably for the elaboration of the 'Kyoto Mechanisms.' One EU  participant commented: 'In retrospect the COP should not have  been about winning things, but about getting on with the job.'  For a number of reasons this was not to be. The attempt by  Argentina to place voluntary commitments for developing  countries on the COP-4 agenda on day one set a tone of suspicion  at the outset. Developing countries raised their guard against  any hint of new obligations or associated conditionalities. This  contributed to the deadlock in the debate on the review of the  adequacy of UNFCCC commitments (Articles 4.2 (a) and (b)),  forcing a postponement of the issue. The G-77/China continues to  view the inadequacy of commitments in terms of the poor  performance of Annex-I Parties, while developed country Parties  insist that the problem is a lack of global participation,  particularly by key developing countries such as China and  Brazil. Moreover, the nature of the COP-4 agenda presented a  compelling opportunity for the G-77/China to maximize its  leverage to secure concessions, notably within the UNFCCC- related agenda items such as technology transfer, finance and  capacity building and by creating a quid pro quo between these  issues and its cooperation on the work plan for the elaboration  of the Kyoto Mechanisms. This, in part, resulted in a round of  'hostage taking' at the final session of the SBI when Parties  withheld support for a number of key elements in draft decisions  and exchanged brackets. The imminent arrival of ministers  further contributed to the drive to hold back on agreements. The  linkages between the demands by the G-77/China for financial and  technical assistance, associated with a desire to remain free of  any attempt by developed countries to build in conditionalities  that might draw them into new commitments, led to unusually  complex linkages. Right up to the closing hours of the  negotiations on Saturday morning, for example, there were long  and difficult exchanges on what turned out to be a win for the  G-77/China on GEF funding. The debate about adverse impacts and  compensation (Articles 4.8 and 4.9) also became tied up in the  package. The OPEC countries tried and failed to link Articles  4.8 and 4.9 and associated Kyoto Protocol measures to an EU  drive to include policies and measures in the work programme.

The resulting exchanges between negotiators were described as  'confrontational in a mild form' but, all in all, a wasted  opportunity. Parties came away with a positive outcome that  indicates a clear desire to move forward with a plan of work.  The task of agenda setting turned into a complex attempt to  anticipate important debates and exercise leverage. Expectations  that substantive work during the COP over priority issues such  as CDM were thus frustrated.

Conclusion: It is difficult to categorize COP-4 as a clear  success or failure. The outcome contains a number of wins for  the G-77/China, such as useful gains on technology and finance  issues. Both the EU and the Umbrella Group (for which the US  acted as spokesperson at the final round of high-level  negotiations) had reasons to promote such an outcome. The EU was  conscious of the lack of attention paid to G-77/China demands in  Kyoto and made serious efforts to address them in Buenos Aires.  The Umbrella Group had a strong interest in moving quickly on  the elaboration of guidelines and principles for the flexibility  mechanisms. With the prospect of Argentina's voluntary  commitment at COP-5, the US has begun to see the results of its  strategy to create conditions for the evolution of the  UNFCCC/Kyoto Protocol process and mechanisms. The inability to  reach agreement in the subsidiary bodies and the consequent need  for high-level political decision-making once again underlined  the inadequacy of the existing processes to resolve the complex  issues at stake. One modest response to this situation was a  decision to make greater use of intersessional ministerial  meetings, an indication that the Kyoto Protocol is destined to  absorb the time and energy of political administrations  throughout the world.

Speaking at COP-3, UNFCCC Executive Secretary Michael Zammit  Cutajar said the key test for Kyoto Protocol process would be  its ability to send a powerful economic signal to policy makers  and the markets. Regular ministerial engagement with the process  suggests that the political signal is gaining strength. Industry  representatives at COP-4 reported that there is evidence, too,  that the economic signal is penetrating new business and  industry constituencies who are responding with greater  pragmatism and increasing interest in identifying business  opportunities. In the final analysis, the significance of this  meeting may not lie in the specifics of the Buenos Aires Plan of  Action but in the fact that despite their vastly differing  positions delegates remained committed to restoring the momentum  of the process by embracing the discipline of self imposed  deadlines.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR

### FCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES

The FCCC Subsidiary Bodies will meet  from 31 May - 11 June 1999 in Bonn, Germany. Jordan has  expressed an interest in hosting COP-5, which will be held from  25 October - 5 November 1999. For more information contact the  FCCC Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999;  e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.de; Internet: http://www.unfccc.de.

### INDUSTRIAL COOPERATION, MARKETING, INNOVATION AND BUSINESS  OPPORTUNITIES FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY

This seminar will meet from  22-28 November 1998 in Brighton, UK. It is sponsored by the  Commonwealth Science Council, Elsevier Science Ltd., Overseas  Development Organization, UNESCO, the World Energy Council, and  the World Renewable Energy Network and will examine the role of  renewable energy systems in meeting the world energy demand for  electricity. For more information contact: A.A.M. Sayigh,  Director General of World Renewable Energy Network; tel: +44  1189 611364; fax: +44 1189 611365; e-mail:  asayigh@netcomuk.co.uk.

### CLIMATE CHANGE IN THE INTRA-AMERICAS

VULNERABILITY, ADAPTATION,  AND MITIGATION CONFERENCE: The Organization of American States  will co-sponsor the international conference 'Climate Change in  the Intra-Americas: Vulnerability, Adaptation and Mitigation,'  along with the US EPA, the Climate Institute, and the  International Hurricane Center. The event will be held at  Florida International University in Miami, from 30 November -  December 4, 1998 (two days of training workshops and three days  of conference with breakout sessions). For more information see  http://www.cpacc.org/infoev.htm, or contact Sheryl Onopchenko,  OAS; tel: +1 202 458-3552.

### IEA INTERNATIONAL WORKSHOP ON TECHNOLOGIES TO REDUCE GREENHOUSE  GAS EMISSIONS

This workshop, co-sponsored by the International  Energy Agency and the US Department of Energy, will be held 4-6  May 1999 in Washington, DC. For more information, contact: John  Newman, International Energy Agency; tel: +33 1 40 57 67 15,  fax: +33 1 40 57 67 49, e-mail: john.newman@iea.org or Jeffery  Dowd, US Department of Energy; tel: +1 202 586-7258; fax: +1 202  586-4447; e-mail: jeff.dowd@hq.doe.gov.

### AIR POLLUTION CONFERENCE

The International Conference on  Modelling, Monitoring and Management of Air Pollution will be  held from 27-29 July 1999 in San Francisco, USA. For more  information contact: the Conference Secretariat, AIR POLLUTION  99, Wessex Institute of Technology, Ashurst, Southampton, SO40  7AA, UK; tel: +44 (0) 1703 293223; fax: +44 (0) 1703 29285; e- mail: wit@wessex.ac.uk; Internet: http://www.wessex.ac.uk.