---
title: "IPCC-24 HIGHLIGHTS"
id: enb12274e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12274e
date: 
abstract: "On Friday, delegates met in plenary throughout the day and into  the night to continue deliberations over the draft SPM. A  consistent format was followed throughout deliberations, with the  Co-Chairs first introducing the text of a paragraph and  highlighting the reasons why some comments by countries and  organizations were or were not incorporated. Delegates then  discussed that paragraph line-by-line."
---

In the morning and afternoon sessions, delegates considered the  section of the SPM concerned with the current status of CCS  technology. In the afternoon and evening, delegates also  considered the section on the geographical relationship between  the sources and storage opportunities for carbon dioxide. Earth  Negotiations Bulletin coverage stopped at 8.00pm.

The contact group established on Thursday to revise the first two  paragraphs of the SPM met for a second time. Other contact groups  were established to discuss a figure representing the geographical  relationship between carbon dioxide emissions sources and storage  potential, and issues on the costs of CCS and its economic  potential.

# CONSIDERATION OF THE DRAFT SUMMARY FOR POLICY MAKERS

Recalling that the SPM had already gone through an extensive  review process, Co-Chair Metz urged delegates to move forward on  approving the draft text. Delegates then turned to a line-by-line  consideration of the text.

###     What is the current status of CCS technology?

BELGIUM said that a  figure representing capture systems was unclear and proposed using  a figure from the Special Report instead. Co-Chair Metz invited  Belgium to work with the Lead Authors on this issue. On the  corrosiveness of pipelines for transportation, delegates agreed to  a proposal by CANADA to remove reference to hydrogen sulphide,  given its negative connotation, and to refer to contaminants  instead.

On geological storage, BELGIUM, with the UK, called for a specific  reference to secure reservoirs. DENMARK, supported by the UK and  the NETHERLANDS, suggested emphasizing caprock as a necessary  trapping mechanism. After Lead Author Peter Cook noted that  caprock is essential unless injection takes place at a certain  depth, language reflecting this was inserted.

On the issue of unminable coal, the UK proposed, and delegates  agreed, to insert a footnote explaining that if the coal was  subsequently mined, carbon dioxide would be released. Delegates  also agreed to add a footnote including reference to the dense  phase of carbon dioxide at depths below 800 meters, as proposed by  the UK with the support of AUSTRIA and the US, and that the  footnote should refer to the recovery of methane, as suggested by  FRANCE. Delegates further agreed to include a figure that would  provide an overview of both offshore and onshore geological  storage options.

Regarding ocean storage technology, discussion centered on whether  the environmental risks of ocean storage should be referred to in  this section and whether the limited stage of development of ocean  storage technology is adequately reflected in the draft text. A  number of countries, including BELGIUM, DENMARK, FRANCE and  GERMANY, supported the inclusion of some sort of reference to  risks. Co-Chair Metz noted that the SPM is organized so that all  risks associated with CCS are addressed in a separate section.  Other countries, including JAPAN, KENYA and SAUDI ARABIA, said  that a reference to risks in this section was not necessary. On  the section noting that ocean storage can be carried out in two  ways, via injection into the water column or via deposits on the  sea floor, AUSTRALIA, supported by BELGIUM and CANADA, suggested  noting that ocean storage may 'potentially' be carried out in two  ways. Although JAPAN and the NETHERLANDS expressed reservations  about this, AUSTRALIA's suggestion was agreed to.

On the relationship between carbon dioxide stored in the ocean and  the global carbon cycle, Lead Author Ken Caldeira noted that the  consequences of the equilibration between carbon dioxide in the  ocean and the atmosphere are nuanced and difficult to express in  the SPM. After further comments from CHILE, NEW ZEALAND and  GERMANY regarding clarification of the process and time scale of  equilibration, delegates agreed to the original version of the  draft text, which states that this carbon dioxide would  'eventually equilibrate with the carbon dioxide in the  atmosphere.' BELGIUM proposed, and delegates agreed, to reference  the section of the Special Report on environmental impacts, risk,  and risk management. Co-Chair Metz noted work would continue with  Japan on clarifying the measurement scale used in a figure  providing an overview of ocean storage options.

After lunch, Co-Chair Davidson introduced text on the reaction of  carbon dioxide with metal oxides, and noted that while the  technology is still in the research phase, certain applications  using waste streams are in the demonstration phrase. Delegates  agreed to the text with minor amendments.

On industrial uses of carbon dioxide, Co-Chair Davidson noted that  the draft text incorporated a proposal by Canada, which was  supported by the US, to note that enhanced oil recovery (EOR) is  excluded from the statement that the potential for industrial uses  of carbon dioxide is small. GERMANY noted that including such a  reference could falsely suggest that EOR is a large opportunity.  Delegates agreed to delete the EOR reference from the text and  that the Co-Chairs would instead develop a footnote to explain it.

Co-Chair Davidson introduced text that: highlights that components  of CCS are in various stages of development; notes that, although  CCS systems can be put together from existing technologies that  are mature or economically feasible under specific conditions, the  maturity of the overall system may be less than some of its  components; and refers to a table summarizing the current maturity  of system components. Delegates approved a comment previously  submitted by Germany to note that there is relatively little  experience in combining carbon dioxide capture, transport and  storage into a fully integrated CCS system, and that the use of  CCS for large scale power plants remains to be implemented.

Delegates discussed proposed revisions to the table on the current  maturity of CCS system components. Several delegates, including  GERMANY, AUSTRIA, EGYPT, the UK, and the NETHERLANDS, proposed  amendments to text in the table caption that would state that more  research and development could reduce costs and improve  reliability and safety. The US raised concerns that such text  would be policy prescriptive. Delegates agreed to delete any text  in the caption that goes beyond explaining that the table is about  the current maturity of CCS system components and that the highest  level of maturity for each component is identified in the table.  On the table itself, delegates also agreed to changes proposed by  GERMANY and others on what is meant by 'market maturity,' and by  JAPAN and KOREA on the inclusion of reference to the two types of  ocean storage: direct injection 'dissolution type' and direct  injection 'lake type.' What is the geographical relationship between the sources and  storage opportunities for carbon dioxide? Delegates then turned to  a consideration of the section of the SPM on large point sources  and their geographical relationship to geological and ocean  storage. Discussions on geological storage focused on types of  sources, the distance from sources to storage locations, and the  location of sources. Delegates agreed to changes proposed by EGYPT  and others clarifying that the text refers to major point sources.  KENYA sought clarification of why a particular figure (300km) was  being used. Lead Author John Gale explained that the 300km should  be taken as a guide. Delegates then agreed to the text with minor  modifications. After the US asked whether sources were  concentrated in urban areas, delegates agreed that the text should  refer to 'industrial and urban areas.' Discussions on ocean storage focused on its regional distribution,  maturity, and location, and on the existing literature. JAPAN  underscored that ocean storage potential varies regionally, and  that Japan has more potential for ocean than geological storage.  AUSTRIA, AUSTRALIA and others expressed concern that the language  implied greater technical maturity and scientific analysis on  ocean storage than actually exists. The US cautioned that the  supporting scientific literature consists of only one report that  should not be generalized. Lead Author Ken Caldeira said there is  a lack of literature on the determining locations for deep ocean  storage. AUSTRALIA, supported by the UK, said that meeting the  depth criteria alone should not be sufficient to establish ocean  storage locations. JAPAN replied that environmental and other  considerations are addressed in other SPM sections. The agreed  text included a statement that 'globally, a small portion of large  point sources is close to potential ocean storage locations.' CHINA, supported by BANGLADESH, EGYPT and SAUDI ARABIA, and  opposed by AUSTRIA, called for removing a reference to developing  countries as possessing the places where most of the increase in  the number of sources is expected to occur. Lead Author John Gale  explained that the reference to developing countries was based on  projection scenarios on future emissions in the Special Report.  AUSTRIA called for distinguishing between large and small point  sources, and suggested referring to projections in the sentence on  future emissions in developing countries.

CANADA, with the US and NORWAY, proposed including information on  storage as well as capture when stating the percentages of global  fossil fuel carbon dioxide emissions that could be suitable for  capture. Lead Author Keywan Riahi clarified that there is  reference to only capture in the SPM and not to storage because  there is a lack of literature on storage. CANADA proposed using  information from power generating emissions, while the US proposed  including emissions from both industry and electricity generation.  MALAYSIA and BELGIUM noted that the Special Report referred to  20 - 40% global fossil fuel carbon dioxide emissions as being  technically suitable for capture, and proposed deleting reference  to economic suitability. AUSTRIA suggested separating the section  of the paragraph on scenario emissions from the section on  emissions amenable to capture. After further discussions and  informal consultations, delegates agreed to remove references to  developing countries and economic suitability, and to state that  the proximity of future large point sources to potential storage  sites has not been studied, rather than that it is uncertain.

On a figure indicating the geographical relationship between  carbon dioxide emission sources and sedimentary basins with  geological storage potential, CHINA proposed removing the figure,  saying that much of the information was not supported by valid  scientific facts, and that it did not include future source  emissions. AUSTRIA, NEW ZEALAND, the US and CANADA supported  keeping the figure because it contains relevant information. Lead  Author John Gale explained the data sources for the figure. A  contact group was convened to resolve this issue, which met into  the evening.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

The workday stretched into the late hours of the night. Despite  the amount of text left to consider and the limited time in which  to do it, the atmosphere remained upbeat throughout the day.  Several IPCC veterans seemed unsurprised at the long days and  speed of progress. Some delegates noted that the momentum and good  will from the morning session began to give way to more serious  disagreements as the day progressed, though they expressed hope  that this trend would reverse on Saturday.