---
title: "INC-11 HIGHLIGHTS: TUESDAY, 7 FEBRUARY 1995"
id: 1203000e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/1203000e
date: 1995-02-07
abstract: 
---

# WORKING GROUP I

Working Group I concluded its deliberations on the review of  national communications. Delegates did not want to consider  the adequacy of commitments until Wednesday and, thus, the  Group adjourned before 4:00 pm.

AGENDA ITEM 7(a)  REVIEW OF NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS:  Working Group I resumed consideration of the Secretariat's  synthesis report and recommendations on national  communications. Poland said the Secretariat's recommended  schedule of national communications  every two years is  too expensive for Parties and would not produce new  information. He also said the recommended annual periodicity  for emissions inventories was too short. Japan said the due  date for the second national communications should be  delayed, but he supported annual emissions inventory  updates. He said CO2 emissions data could be collected with  a reasonable workload, but that inclusion of other gases  should be optional. The US said that the Secretariat's  report focused too much on CO2, suggesting that Parties  needed to focus on all gases. He did not think Parties  should be named in the report. He supported the  Secretariat's recommended time frames, but urged development  of guidelines for developing country Parties.

Russia said the synthesis report did not yet present a clear  picture of emissions trends. He said the complexities in  reporting make it impossible to agree to a new timetable and  called for improved aggregations of emissions by sector to  examine collective implementation by Annex 1 Parties.  Switzerland said naming specific Parties would be acceptable  in the synthesis report. Supported by the Czech Republic,  she suggested a four-year cycle for subsequent national  communications and questioned the usefulness of annual  inventories. Norway said the synthesis report clearly  indicates that further action is needed to meet Convention  objectives, and supported naming Parties in the synthesis  report, the Secretariat's recommendation on periodicity, and  improved guidelines and evaluation of policy measures.

Hungary recommended averaging several years' emissions  rather than using one year for an inventory baseline. He  suggested biannual inventories and a four-year periodicity  for full communications, and supported naming Parties in the  synthesis report. Mauritius said the Secretariat should  consider non-Annex 1 Parties' communications in reviewing  guidelines. New Zealand said while a decision on periodicity  of national communications could wait for more experience  from the SBSTA, she supports annual inventories.

Australia supported annual emissions updates, but  recommended that the COP define comparable reporting years.   Canada said Parties need to resolve deviations from the  guidelines, requested flexibility on the exact date for  submissions and supported annual inventories by Annex 1  Parties. China said the 15 submissions fail to meet the  Convention's requirements because many lack documentation  and evaluations of policies, and do not describe financial   contributions to developing countries. France, on behalf of  the EU, said that the synthesis report should be more  flexible in naming Parties, periodicity could await  subsidiary bodies' advice, and annual inventories should be  extended to all GHGs. Argentina supported naming Parties and  the Secretariat's proposed timetable. The Climate Action  Network presented an NGO evaluation of 20 OECD countries'  plans, noting that although procedural implementation is  moving forward, more needs to be done substantively. Without  a protocol, further progress would be undermined as Parties  encounter political difficulties.

AGENDA ITEM 7(b)  REVIEW OF ADEQUACY OF COMMITMENTS: The  Chair invited delegates to address the adequacy of  commitments. The Secretariat reviewed information on the  global situation, past decisions and the need to address  other areas. He said the IPCC Special Report, its guidelines  document and various peer reviewed studies compiled in  A/AC.237/Misc.43 covered the global situation, and invited  comments on these documents, as well as A/AC/L.23 and  A/AC/L.23/Add. 1, the AOSIS protocol and the German  proposals. The Philippines, on behalf of the G-77 and China,  said they are more concerned with full implementation of the  Convention than with reviewing the adequacy of commitments.  He said the objective for INC-11 and COP-1 is to ensure that  the Convention can be implemented.

# WORKING GROUP II

Working Group II completed  consideration of the maintenance  of interim financial arrangements and opened discussion of  modalities and funding needs.

AGENDA ITEM 8(b)  MAINTENANCE OF INTERIM FINANCIAL  ARRANGEMENTS: During the discussion of the Co-Chair's draft  decision, Brazil, Uganda, the Republic of Korea, Malaysia  and Iran supported the G-77 amendments, which clarified that  the GEF shall continue to be the interim entity entrusted  with the operation of the financial mechanism. Uganda and  Malaysia felt that the relationship between the GEF Council  and the COP requires further work and evaluation. The  Netherlands and Norway said that the restructured GEF is now  in conformity with the conditions in Article 21.3 and should  permanently operate the financial mechanism. The US,  supported by the Netherlands, warned that if the question of  the financial mechanism is left open, it will sow doubt  among people outside this process.

The Co-Chair, Nobutoshi Akao, proposed a compromise for the  first paragraph: Decides that the interim arrangements with  the restructured GEF, referred to in Article 21.3, shall be  maintained. Malaysia supported the proposal. The  Netherlands and Canada responded that the question of  permanency should not be postponed and rejected the Co- Chair's proposal.

The Philippines and Peru did not believe that the GEF has  been adequately restructured, especially with regard to  universality of participation. While the Co-Chair implored  delegates not to argue about restructuring, the US, France,  Japan and Australia responded, since the issue of   universality had been vigorously negotiated. Mauritius said  restructuring was a precondition for the GEF to be the  interim, not the permanent, operating agency. The question  before the Group is whether the interim arrangement is to be  maintained. The question of a permanent financial mechanism  is rather premature. Benin noted that the fourth requirement  in Article 11.3, determination of the amount of funding  necessary and available for the implementation of the  Convention, is not settled.

France, supported by the Philippines, Colombia, South Africa  and others, called for the establishment of a small working  group to address this issue. The Co-Chair asked John Ashe  (Antigua and Barbuda) to chair this open-ended small group.

AGENDA ITEM 8(a)(i)  MODALITIES: The Co-Chair initiated a  discussion on possible arrangements between the COP and the  operating entity for the financial mechanism, using the  suggested elements in paragraph 11 of document A/AC.237/87.  France, on behalf of the EU, supported using a Memorandum of  Understanding (MOU) as a form of institutional arrangement  and agreed with the procedure for creating the agreement.  She added that paragraphs 25 and 28 contained ambiguities,  which must be clarified in the MOU, and that paragraph 19  must clarify how the COP can inform the GEF or other  organization on reconsideration of funding decisions. The  Co-Chair warned against micro- management of the operating  entity, but reiterated that any decision must be consistent  with COP policies. Japan suggested deleting the list of  specific articles from paragraph 31, on the mobilization of  funds. Co-Chair James Stovall opened the afternoon session  by noting a general sense of agreement that the Secretariats  of the Convention and the GEF should draft an agreement.

AGENDA ITEM 8(a)(ii)  GUIDANCE: The Co-Chair then invited  comments on Agenda Item 8(a)(ii), Guidance, based on  documents A/AC.237/Misc.40-41 and A/AC.237/86-88. Saudi  Arabia asked for specific inclusion of the position of the  G-77 and China for consideration with A/AC.237/Misc.41. The  Co-Chair replied that the document represented a composite  text and any text in dispute was underlined.

Sub-paragraph 1(a)(v): France, supported by the US,  preferred the second bracketed option, which listed specific  elements of national programmes subject to mitigation and  adaption measures, but suggested moving it to paragraph 2 on  programme priorities. The Philippines said that the G-77 had  not readressed its INC-10  position on this issue and she  could not speak on their behalf. Saudi Arabia stressed the  need for generality, and agreed with deleting the sub- paragraph. The Co-Chair then suggested the possibility of  deleting the debated portion of sub-paragraph (v), but  leaving in paragraph 2(e), on implementation.

Sub-paragraph 1(a)(vii): France suggested that this sub- paragraph, on mobilization of funds, be deleted because the  sub-paragraph requires the funding mechanism to ensure  predictability of resources, and shifts the commitment to  ensure funds onto the operating entity. The US was concerned  about linking several parts of the Convention without   actually adding anything. Japan also had difficulty  accepting this sub-paragraph. However, Egypt, India and the  Philippines voiced strong objections. They noted the sub- paragraph only required the entity to take full account of  the predictability of funds in decision making, but did not  require ensuring predictable funds. China reminded delegates  that this sub-paragraph added no new requirements and took  two days of negotiation during INC-10. France and the  Philippines disagreed as to the sub-paragraph's application  to Article 4.3, developed States' obligations. The US  reiterated that the COP has responsibility for mobilizing  funds.

Paragraph 1(b) addresses activities undertaken outside the  framework of the financial mechanism. There was still some  question about the location of sub-paragraph (iii), which  prohibits new forms of conditionality. Egypt and other G-77  countries prefer that this sub-paragraph either follow or be  appended to the first sub-paragraph on consistency between  activities outside and within the financial mechanism.  Australia disagreed.

India proposed deleting sub-paragraph (ii) on information  from multilateral and regional financial institutions. The  US wanted to retain it. Japan and Australia suggested  deleting the underlined portions. On sub-paragraph (iv),  China suggested retaining the first sentence on measures for  promoting consistency, and deleting the rest. The US and  Japan wanted to retain the entire paragraph. New Zealand  proposed: The Secretariat and the operating entity or  entities of the financial mechanism should promote  consistency. Initial measures for promoting such consistency  would include information collection and analysis, and  appropriate contact with relevant institutions and  organizations. India suggested deleting the entire  paragraph since it micro-manages the GEF.

### EU PAPER ON DETERMINATION OF THE AMOUNT OF FUNDING NECESSARY  AND AVAILABLE

France, on behalf of the EU, introduced a  paper on necessary and available funding. She noted that in  addition to the GEF, other traditional sources of funding  are important, including multilateral banks, financial  assistance, private sector and national resources. Needs  must be clearly defined in the plans designed by developing  countries. Available funds must first cover incremental  costs, which should be determined jointly by the entity  entrusted with financial mechanism and the country  concerned. Since the extent of funding necessary will be  based on national communications of developing country  Parties, the timing of reviews should be linked to the rate  of which such communications become available.

China thought that the paper put the cart before the horse  because developing countries need financial and technical  assistance to implement the Convention and submit reports.  Benin and Peru echoed these concerns. India asked the EU to  examine the paper produced by the G-77 at INC-10 on  communication of information by non-Annex I Parties. France  responded that the EU believes that the preparatory work on   national communications will be financed by the financial  mechanism. Discussion will continue after delegates have a  chance to study the paper.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

The Climate Action Network has been actively lobbying G-77  countries to endorse the AOSIS draft protocol, which calls  for a reduction of emissions of greenhouse gases by at least  20% by the year 2005. Meanwhile, others are trying to  convince delegates that such a protocol is unnecessary. The  fate of the protocol is still uncertain both within the G-77  and in the Committee as a whole. With so much concern over  the adequacy or inadequacy of commitments, as evidenced  by the crowds in Working Group I, many are looking forward  to the discussion on this matter.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### PLENARY

The first item on the Plenary's agenda this morning  is the introduction of documents A/AC.237/L.23, the AOSIS  draft protocol, and A/AC.237/L.23/Add.1, German proposals  for further elements of a protocol to the Convention. The  Plenary will also address Agenda Item 4, Review of Annexes  to the Convention, and Agenda Item 10, Review of  extrabudgetary funds.

### WORKING GROUP I

After Plenary, Working Group I will address  Agenda Item 7(b), Review of adequacy of commitments.

### WORKING GROUP II

Working Group II will meet this afternoon  to continue to discuss document A/AC.237/Misc.41 on guidance  to the financial mechanism.