---
title: "REPORT OF THE MEETINGS OF THE FCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES: 2 – 12 JUNE 1998"
id: enb1286e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1286e
date: 1998-06-12
abstract: "The subsidiary bodies of the UN Framework Convention on Climate  Change (FCCC) met from 2-12 June 1998 in Bonn, Germany. These  were the first formal FCCC meetings since the adoption of the  Kyoto Protocol at the Third Conference of the Parties (COP-3) in  December 1997. The eighth session of the Subsidiary Body for  Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA-8) agreed to draft  conclusions on, inter alia, cooperation with relevant  international organizations, methodological issues, and  education and training. The eighth session of the Subsidiary  Body for Implementation (SBI) reached conclusions on, inter  alia, national communications, the financial mechanism and the  second review of adequacy of Annex I Party commitments. In its  sixth session, the Ad Hoc Group on Article 13 (AG13) concluded  its work on the functions of the Multilateral Consultative  Process (MCP)."
---

After joint SBI/SBSTA consideration and extensive contact group  debates on the flexibility mechanisms, delegates could only  agree to a compilation document containing proposals from the G-77/China, the EU and the US.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FCCC AND THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

The first meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the FCCC  (COP-1) took place in Berlin from 28 March - 7 April 1995. In  addition to addressing a number of important issues related to  the future of the Convention, delegates reached agreement on  what many believed to be the central issue before COP-1 -  adequacy of commitments, the 'Berlin Mandate.' The result was to  establish an open-ended Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate  (AGBM) to begin a process toward appropriate action for the  period beyond 2000, including the strengthening of the  commitments of Annex I Parties through the adoption of a  protocol or another legal instrument.

COP-1 also requested the Secretariat to make arrangements for  sessions of SBSTA and SBI. SBSTA would serve as the link between  scientific, technical and technological assessments, the  information provided by competent international bodies, and the  policy-oriented needs of the COP. During the AGBM process, SBSTA  addressed several issues, including the treatment of the IPCC's  Second Assessment Report (SAR). SBI was created to develop  recommendations to assist the COP in the review and assessment  of the implementation of the Convention and in the preparation  and implementation of its decisions. SBI also addressed several  key issues during the AGBM process, such as national  communications and activities implemented jointly.

The Ad Hoc Group on Article 13 (AG13) was set up to consider the  establishment of a multilateral consultative process available  to Parties to resolve questions on implementation. AG13-1, held  from 30-31 October 1995 in Geneva, decided to request Parties,  non-Parties, and intergovernmental and non-governmental  organizations to make written submissions in response to a  questionnaire on a multilateral consultative process (MCP).  Delegates continued their discussion over the course of three  meetings. At their fifth session, they agreed that the MCP  should be advisory rather than supervisory in nature and AG13  should complete its work by COP-4.

### AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE

The AGBM met eight times  between August 1995 and COP-3 in December 1997. During the first  three sessions, delegates focused on analyzing and assessing  possible policies and measures for the strengthening of the  commitments of Annex I Parties, how Annex I countries might  distribute or share new commitments, and whether commitments  should take the form of an amendment or protocol. AGBM-4, which  coincided with COP-2 in Geneva in July 1996, completed its in- depth analysis of the likely elements of a protocol and States  appeared ready to prepare a negotiating text. At AGBM-5, which  met in December 1996, delegates recognized the need to decide  whether or not to allow mechanisms that would provide Annex I  Parties with flexibility in meeting quantified emission  limitation and reduction objectives (QELROs).

As the Protocol was drafted during the sixth and seventh  sessions of the AGBM, in March and August 1997, respectively,  delegates 'streamlined' a framework compilation text by merging  or eliminating some overlapping provisions within the myriad of  proposals. Much of the discussion centered on a proposal from  the EU for a 15% cut in a 'basket' of three greenhouse gases by  the year 2010 compared to 1990 levels. In October 1997, as AGBM- 8 began, US President Bill Clinton included a call for  'meaningful participation' by developing countries in the  negotiating position he announced in Washington. With those  words, the debates that shaped agreement back in 1995  resurfaced, with an insistence on G-77/China involvement once  again linked to the level of ambition acceptable by the US. In  response, the G-77/China used every opportunity to distance  itself from any attempts to draw developing countries into  agreeing to anything that could be interpreted as new  commitments.

### COP-3

The Third Conference of the Parties (COP-3) to the FCCC  was held from 1 - 11 December 1997 in Kyoto, Japan. Over 10,000  participants, including representatives from governments,  intergovernmental organizations, NGOs and the press, attended  the Conference, which included a high-level segment featuring  statements from over 125 ministers. Following a week and a half  of intense formal and informal negotiations, including a session  that began on the final evening and lasted into the following  day, Parties to the FCCC adopted the Kyoto Protocol on 11  December.

In the Kyoto Protocol, Annex I Parties to the FCCC agreed to  commitments with a view to reducing their overall emissions of  six greenhouse gases (GHGs) by at least 5% below 1990 levels  between 2008 and 2012. The Protocol also establishes emissions  trading, 'joint implementation' between developed countries, and  a 'clean development mechanism' (CDM) to encourage joint  emissions reduction projects between developed and developing  countries.

As of 9 May 1998, the following 39 Parties had signed the Kyoto  Protocol (in order of signature): Maldives, Samoa, Antigua and  Barbuda, Switzerland, Saint Lucia, Argentina, Marshall Islands,  Micronesia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Seychelles, the  Philippines, Malta, Costa Rica, Japan, Austria, Germany,  Finland, Portugal, France, Sweden, Belgium, Spain, Denmark,  Greece, Italy, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, the UK, Brazil,  Norway, Monaco, Australia, Canada, Ireland, New Zealand, China,  Panama, El Salvador and Mexico. These Parties represent 39% of  Annex I CO2 emissions. Under Protocol Article 25, the Protocol  will enter into force after it has been ratified by 55 Parties  to the FCCC, incorporating Parties included in Annex I that  account for at least 55% of the total carbon dioxide emissions  for 1990.

# AD HOC GROUP ON ARTICLE 13

In his opening remarks on Friday, 5 June, AG13 Chair Patrick  Széll (UK) recalled that during AG13-5, delegates agreed that  the Multilateral Consultative Process (MCP) should be advisory  rather than supervisory in nature. They also agreed that AG13  should complete its work by COP-4. He stressed that the meeting  would discuss only the MCP under the Convention and not the  Protocol. From 5-11 June, delegates deliberated on the heavily  bracketed draft text (FCCC/AG13/1997/4) from AG13-5. A drafting  group, chaired by Clara Musendo (Zimbabwe), was convened to  incorporate new proposals.

On paragraph 1, (establishment of the MCP), delegates agreed on  a 'standing' Multilateral Consultative Committee reporting to  the COP.

On paragraph 2 (objective of the MCP), a drafting group agreed  to remove brackets from the paragraph stating that 'the  objective of the MCP is to resolve questions regarding  implementation of the FCCC by providing advice on assistance to  Parties to overcome difficulties in their implementation,  promote understanding of the FCCC, and prevent disputes.' On paragraph 3 (nature of the MCP), delegates debated the  description of the MCP as 'transparent.' Following the  discussion, the Chair invited a small group to draft an  interpretative statement for inclusion in the AG13 report,  indicating that transparency should be understood as a reference  to the overall process and outcome and not to the question of  access to meetings. The delegates agreed to these conclusions.

On paragraph 4 (nature of the MCP), AUSTRALIA raised the  possibility of duplication by the MCP of other FCCC dispute  settlement work. The EU, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES and IRAN noted the  MCP's purpose is advisory only and that duplication was dealt  with in paragraph 6.

On paragraph 5 (mandate), Parties debated the implications of a  reference to provision of 'the' appropriate assistance.  Delegates agreed to language indicating that assistance would be  purely advisory.

Paragraph 6, on avoiding duplication with other FCCC bodies, was  accepted without debate.

On paragraph 8 (expertise), delegates agreed, based on proposals  from GHANA and the EU, that the Multilateral Consultative  Committee should comprise persons nominated by governments who  are experts in relevant fields, such as science, socioeconomics  and the environment.

In paragraph 10 (deliberations), the EU, supported by SLOVENIA  and GHANA, proposed that the Committee meet 'at least once a  year.' The delegates also accepted an EU proposal to merge  paragraphs 10 (deliberations) and 11 (governance).

On paragraph 12, delegates debated who could trigger the MCP.  CANADA, Chair of the drafting group, reported that Parties  agreed the MCP can be triggered by: a Party with respect to its  own implementation; a group of Parties with respect to their own  implementation; a Party or group of Parties with respect to  implementation by another Party or group of Parties; and/or the  Conference of the Parties.

On paragraph 13 (outcome) the delegates deliberated on the  reporting of the Committee, access to the reports of the work of  the Committee, frequency and form of the reports and whether  reports should be subject to consent of Parties concerned.  Consensus was reached in the drafting group to forward concerned  Parties' comments on the conclusions and recommendations  together with the Committee's report to the COP.

On paragraph 14 (evolution), delegates accepted text noting that  these terms of reference may be amended by the COP.

A substantial part of the AG13 deliberations dealt with  paragraphs 7 (size of the committee) and 9 (Constitution), which  were considered jointly. Delegates generally agreed to: limit  the number of participants in the Multilateral Consultative  Committee, rotate terms of two or three years; and permit the  other subsidiary bodies' Chairs to participate as observers.  They were divided over exact membership numbers, with the EU,  SLOVENIA, the US and others favoring 15 or fewer members for  administrative efficiency while the G-77/CHINA called for 25  members to allow the inclusion of a broader competence base and  avoid difficulties with constituting a separate roster of  experts. Language allowing for a roster of experts in paragraph  9 was not supported. This issue was not resolved and will be  discussed at COP-4.

The EU and G-77/CHINA accepted unbracketed text on equitable  geographical distribution among regions, but the US proposed  dividing membership equally between Annex I and non-Annex I  Parties and suggested that 'equitable geographical distribution'  be replaced with 'with one half to be designated by Annex I- Parties and one half to be designated by non-Annex I Parties.'  He argued that the Committee was the first under the Convention  and thus was not compelled to apply the UN system of  apportionment. The G-77/CHINA disagreed, saying that they were  unable to undermine well-established UN practices on equitable  geographical distribution and rotation principles. The US  further objected to the language used in the Chair's report on  the work of AG13. He noted that even though the US raised the  objection in Plenary, several other countries had expressed  their support for the US position during the contact group. The  G-77/CHINA objected to stating that the report only covered the  formal proceedings.

On Tuesday, 9 June, a small group was convened to try to resolve  the two outstanding issues. On 11 June, AG13 Chair Széll  reported on the results from the contact group. The group agreed  that in paragraph 9 of the terms of reference for the MCP,  'geographical distribution' would not be placed in brackets,  with a footnote denoting that this represents the view of G-77/China and others. The proposal by the US to designate half  the members for Annex I Parties and half for non-Annex I Parties  would be placed in brackets with a similar footnote denoting  that it represents the view expressed by some Parties. Paragraph  11 of the report of AG13-6 was modified accordingly.

In the new draft, a paragraph on the budgetary provisions for  1999 was included. With no objections raised by the Parties, the  report of the meeting and annexes, including a draft terms of  reference of the MCP (FCCC/AG13/1998/L.1), were adopted and will  be presented at COP-4.

SUBSIDIARY BODY FOr SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE In his opening statement on Tuesday, 2 June, SBSTA Chair Kok Kee  Chow (Malaysia) urged delegates to prepare recommendations for  decisions to be adopted at COP-4, which will take place in  November 1998 in Buenos Aires, Argentina. The G-77/CHINA  underscored the importance of the Protocol's entry into force as  soon as possible and cautioned against distractions. He  expressed 'extreme' disappointment at the low targets agreed to  in Kyoto and requested an additional item on methodological  issues related to Articles 4.8 and 4.9 (adverse effects of  climate change and impacts of response measures). Delegates  debated this proposal at length, and agreed to include an item  on 'referrals from SBI.' No progress was made on the election of officers other than the  Chair during the meeting and on 12 June the Chair noted that  regional groupings will continue consultations on this issue  until SBSTA-9, which will meet in November.

The SBSTA held eight sessions, in addition to the three joint  sessions held with the SBI to consider flexibility mechanisms.  SBSTA considered the following agenda items: cooperation with  relevant international organizations; methodological issues;  education, training and public awareness; development and  transfer of technologies; and the roster of experts. Several  contact groups also met to further discuss issues and draft  conclusions. Several of the contact groups met in closed  sessions, while others were open to NGO attendance. The second  week the Bureau decided that all contact group meetings would be  open unless the group objected.

# COOPERATION WITH RELEVANT INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

On 2 June, delegates heard presentations by the representatives  of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the  Global Climate Observatory Systems (GCOS) and the International  Geosphere and Biosphere Programme (IGBP) (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/2; and  MISC.1). Dr. Robert Watson (IPCC) said the IPCC will produce  technical reports to assist the operationalization of the  Protocol on: emission scenarios, which will review the  literature and formulate a new set of scenarios; methodological  and technological issues in technology transfer; and aviation  and the global atmosphere, which will assess the relevant  atmospheric science, aviation technology and socioeconomic  issues. The Third Assessment Report will place climate change in  a broader evolving social context.

Dr. Thomas Spence (GCOS) said that a third draft of the work  report covering the status of current systems and  recommendations, and fundamental observations on short- and  long-term variability, will soon be available. He noted that  systems currently in use are usually not set up for climate  purposes, resulting in some inconsistencies in data collected.

Dr. Will Stephen (IGBP) said his organization's research  provides a broad scientific context against which to judge  proposed actions under the Protocol. He said that when  negotiating consideration should be given to issues such as the  saturation of carbon sinks.

Deliberations on this issue continued on Wednesday, 3 June. The  MARSHALL ISLANDS sought clarification from the IPCC regarding  how regional implications will be covered in the Third  Assessment Report (TAR). The US discussed the current capacity  of the IPCC to undertake further methodological work, the  structure envisioned by the IPCC to accommodate the short- and  long-term needs of the Parties, and the expertise required to  support work. The US, AUSTRALIA and the EU urged Parties to  prioritize observatory systems and highlighted the deteriorating  conditions of the systems in use. The EU and UZBEKISTAN sought  Global Environment Facility (GEF) resources to assist developing  countries and countries with economies in transition in their  observational work. The US, supported by JAPAN and the EU,  called for collaboration with the International Civil Aviation  Organiation (ICAO) and International Maritime Organization (IMO)  specifically in studies on bunker emissions. UGANDA underscored  the absence of climate information on Africa and sought support  for meteorological and hydrological services.

On Friday, 12 June, delegates considered draft conclusions  (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.4) on this agenda item. The draft  conclusions noted: that other international organizations such  as ICAO and IMO will be invited to make progress on their work  of relevance to the Convention and provide reports to SBSTA; the  statement by UNEP's Executive Director on the role of UNEP, as  set out in the UN General Assembly's Programme for the Further  Implementation of Agenda 21; the IPCC's programme of work and  forthcoming Third Assessment Report (TAR); and welcomed UNEP's  readiness to raise awareness of climate change. The conclusions  were adopted with some modifications.

# ANNEX I NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS

On Wednesday, 3 June, delegates discussed Annex I national  communications (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/3 and MISC.3). The EU called for  a Secretariat report on revisions proposed by Parties for  consideration at SBSTA-9 and COP-5. The MARSHALL ISLANDS said  stricter adherence to existing reporting guidelines, rather than  full-scale revision, may be needed. The US highlighted the  importance of inventories and sought revisions guidelines on  policies and measures (P&Ms), national circumstances and  technology transfer. CANADA cited examples of inconsistencies in  national communications stemming from a lack of clarity in the  guidelines. SWITZERLAND said the Secretariat should record the  difficulties cited by countries and called for revision of in- depth review projects. He also raised the issue of expert post  reviews and evaluation of GHG inventories, and proposed a set of  decisions for COP-4, calling for consideration of aerosols from  combustion of fossil fuels, biomass burning and other greenhouse  gas precursors as highlighted by the IPCC's Second Assessment  Report (SAR).

On Thursday, 11 June, the Chair's draft conclusions were  presented calling upon Parties to provide submissions to the  Secretariat on clarifications, additions and/or amendments to  the revised guidelines for the preparation of Annex I national  communications and proposed one workshop on national  communications and another with the aim of addressing the  problems identified by SBSTA. The draft conclusions  (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/L.2) on this item were adopted without  amendment.

# METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES

Several issues were considered under this agenda item, including  emission inventories, land use change and forestry, the impacts  of a single project on emissions in the commitment period, and  the scientific and methodological aspects of the proposal by  Brazil based on historic emissions.

Emission Inventories: Delegates discussed emission inventories  on Thursday, 4 June (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/4, and Misc.2). The US and  the EU stressed the need to incorporate the additional  methodological issues raised by the Kyoto Protocol into the  existing guidelines to enhance understanding of the three new  gases under the Kyoto Protocol. POLAND stressed further work on  emission factors since these differ for different sectors,  between and within countries. He called for guidelines for the  preparation of default projections.

On Thursday, 11 June, the draft conclusions  (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/L.3) were adopted. They call for active  participation by Parties in the ongoing activities of the  current programme of work on GHG inventories methodology and  call upon Parties to organize a workshop with the participation  of methodological experts from the roster of experts as well as  other relevant organizations. They also note that the Kyoto  Protocol includes provisions related to GHG inventory methods  and recognize the methodological issues arising from them.

Land use change and forestry: On 4 June, delegates addressed  land use change and forestry (LUCF) during general statements on  methodological issues. Some countries, including JAPAN and the  US, noted the urgent need for a decision including anthropogenic  activities because this influences the ability of some countries  to ratify and implement the Protocol. The EU reaffirmed that  inclusion of sink activities should not undermine incentives for  action on gross emission mitigation. MAURITANIA and ICELAND  cautioned against concentrating solely on forests and  conservation. The Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS)  expressed concern over 'blanket' inclusion of all land use and  forestry activities in sinks since this would introduce  uncertainties and distract the Protocol from focusing on fossil  fuel dependence.

Several delegations said SBSTA should call on the IPCC to  address outstanding technical questions in a special report. The  EU called for work on methodologies for quantifying changes in  soil carbon as a result of forest activities since 1990. With  AOSIS, JAPAN, the US and AUSTRALIA, he sought clarification of  IPCC terms and definitions of afforestation, reforestation and  deforestation. CANADA said soil sink projects should be included  under the CDM. The US cautioned against delays in the CDM  process and said sink-related activity must move forward in the  project-based process. COLOMBIA stressed that technical aspects  of Kyoto Protocol Article 3.3 (sinks related to forests), such  as establishing what is meant by net change in stock, must be  resolved. Addressing Kyoto Protocol Article 3.4 (other sinks)  depends on the will of some Parties. NORWAY and CANADA sought to  establish a process to enable COP-5 to consider sinks.

A contact group on land use change and forestry (LUCF), chaired  by Paul Maclons (South Africa) and Maciej Sadowski (Poland), met  four times in closed and open sessions. While agreeing on the  need for an IPCC report, delegates disagreed on the content,  timing and consideration of its results. Debate centered on:  inter alia: holding a workshop to consider Article 3.4 after  COP-4; specific articles for consideration by IPCC in its  special report; the impact of addressing only forests as sinks;  and whether the special report will be considered at COP-6, or  at the first meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol  (COP/MOP-1). On Thursday, 11 June, the contact group agreed to  the Chair's revised draft conclusions.

On Friday, 12 June, SBSTA adopted draft conclusions on LUCF  (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.3). The draft conclusions state that SBSTA  understands Article 3.3 to mean: the adjustment to a Party's  assigned amount shall be equal to the verifiable changes in  carbon stocks during the period 2008 to 2012 resulting from  direct human-induced activities of afforestation, reforestation  and deforestation since 1 January 1990. Where the result of this  calculation is a net sink, this value shall be added to the  Party's assigned amount. Where the result of this calculation is  a net emission, this value shall be subtracted from the Party's  assigned amount.

SBSTA also requested the Secretariat to organize a workshop of  experts prior to COP-4 to consider data availability based on  definitions by Parties in relation to Article 3.3. This workshop  would report to SBSTA-9. SBSTA also agreed to plan a workshop  after COP-4 to focus on issues arising from Article 3.4. SBSTA  requested the IPCC to prepare a special report to enable the COP  to take decisions on land use, land change and forestry at  COP/MOP-1. The special report would address the methodological,  scientific and technical implications of the Protocol,  particularly Article 3. The conclusions also state that issues  not covered by the special report would be included in the TAR.  BRAZIL amended language in the conclusions on 'including those  nominated by the IPCC,' to anyone 'engaged in the IPCC process.'  The conclusions were adopted as amended. JAPAN noted its  intention to make a financial contribution to the workshop to be  held prior to COP-4.

Impacts of single projects in commitment period: In a proposal  submitted to SBSTA (FCCC/SB/1998/MISC.1/Add.2) on Wednesday, 3  June, ICELAND expressed concern over the difficulties faced to  small countries arising from the setting of quantified limits on  single project emissions and called for the adoption of a  threshold value for significant proportional impact and separate  reporting of process emissions. AOSIS and the US expressed  concern. The EU recalled that differences in quantified emission  reductions were already addressed and was reluctant to give  exceptions for single projects. SWITZERLAND said the proposed  would threaten credibility.

On Thursday, 11 June, ICELAND presented a revised proposal  (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/MISC1/Add 4.) that included an extra  requirement on the definition of small economies and also  specified that separate reporting of process emissions can only  be initiated in the event that the assigned emissions amounts  are exceeded as a result of single projects. He said that the  suggested criteria limits application to only three Annex I  Parties. The delegates adopted draft conclusions  (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/L.5) that invited consideration of the issue at  SBSTA-9 and acknowledged the additional information provided.

Scientific and methodological aspects of a proposal made by  Brazil: On Friday, 5 June, delegates considered the scientific  and methodological aspects of a proposal made by Brazil  (FCCC/AGBM/1997/MISC.3/Add.1) during the AGBM process and  forwarded by COP-3 to SBSTA. BRAZIL recalled that the proposal  contains a clean development fund that has been replaced by the  Kyoto Protocol's Clean Development Mechanism (CDM). The proposal  contains a technical and scientific aspect that establishes a  methodology for linking the historical responsibility for  increasing global temperature with the responsibility for  lowering emissions. He proposed a contact group to consider the  issue at this meeting and announced his Government will convene  an expert meeting soon. CHINA said the proposal highlights the  'real' relative responsibility of Annex I and non-Annex I  countries. GREENPEACE said some of the methodology needs  enhancement, noting that the proposal contains no methodology  for several technical and policy assumptions. He said further  development would be useful for the second review of adequacy of  commitments. The EU, the US, SWITZERLAND and AUSTRALIA said the  proposal requires broader discussion and expressed concern  about, inter alia: the method for reconstructing historical  emissions; indicators that ignore the rate of change; and the  availability of data. A group was convened to work on concrete  suggestions on advancing the proposal.

On Thursday, 11 June the contact group presented draft  conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/L.6) recognizing that there were  outstanding issues and welcoming the offer by Brazil to host a  workshop and report back to SBSTA-9.

Technology transfer and technology information centres On Thursday, 4 June, SBSTA considered development and transfer  of technologies (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/5, INF.2, INF.5 and MISC.4).  Regarding the poor responses to the technology needs survey, the  G-77/CHINA explained that this can be attributed to the absence  of specific frameworks for the implementation of the Convention.  AUSTRALIA called for the identification of synergies in  technology transfer activities under other Conventions. With the  US, he noted that national communications of non-Annex I  countries would be helpful in identifying technology needs and  underscored the role of the private sector. The EU expressed  hope that the flexibility mechanisms proposed under the Protocol  would facilitate the transfer of technology. URUGUAY noted the  need to transfer concrete emissions reduction projects, not just  reports. He recommended a financial mechanism for technology  transfer. CHINA said the issue of technology transfer had been  marginalized and noted that it is different from information  centers. COP-4 should address this as a separate agenda item.  CHILE noted the potential for technology transfers through the  CDM.

On the issue of technology information centres, delegates called  for: the identification and assessment of means to improve the  flow of information and technology; the establishment of  regional centres; greater engagement of the private sector;  consideration of needs and participation of beneficiaries; and  the need to develop, strengthen and use existing institutions.  On technology work programmes, delegates recommended: improved  government coordination; identification of barriers to transfer;  incentives for transfers by the private sector; and a September  deadline for submissions on the work programme.

The contact group on technology, co-chaired by Renate Christ  (EC) and Wanna Tanunchaiwatana (Thailand) met throughout the  week and considered the Co-Chairs' proposed conclusions.  Delegates debated various formulations on identification of  technology information needs in non-Annex I communications and  proposals on next steps for technology information centres.  Under a proposal from the US and the EU, the first step would be  to assess the extent to which managers and technicians in  relevant sectors are aware of such technologies and processes,  followed by the identification of sources and supplies. SBSTA  would request the Secretariat to, inter alia, identify the  desired functions and services to be provided by such centres  and networks. Under a G-77/China proposal, SBSTA would state  that initial priority should be given to supporting the  establishment and enhancement of national and regional  technology information centres. The contact group did not reach  agreement on these issues.

On Friday, 12 June, SBSTA considered draft conclusions  (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.5). The conclusions contain bracketed text  noting that non-Annex I communications are an important means of  identifying technology information needs to facilitate [adequate  adaptation to climate change]or[the implementation of their  obligations under the Convention] and urging non-Annex I Parties  to identify their needs in accordance with decision 10/CP.2,  paragraph 20.

Regarding the bracketed text, the G-77/CHINA and the MARSHALL  ISLANDS preferred the first bracketed proposal. The US favored  the second formulation, noting the first option limits the scope  of the paragraph. He said the latter would include references to  adaptation and mitigation. Concerned delegations engaged in  informal consultations throughout the day. Delegates agreed to:  'adequate adaptation to climate change in accordance with  decision 10/CP.2, paragraph 21, and to facilitate implementation  of their obligations under the Convention in accordance with  10/CP.2, paragraph 20, and may include other relevant  information in accordance with 10/CP.2.' Under the conclusions, SBSTA noted the results of the expanded  technology and technology needs survey and that the  identification of technology information needs at the country  level is an important step in relation to the improvement and  development of modalities for the diffusion and transfer of  technologies. The conclusions also state that SBSTA took up the  question of technology information centres but was not able to  reach consensus. Views of the EU, the US and the G-77/China were  compiled in document FCCC/SBSTA/1998/MISC.5. Discussion of this  issue will continue at SBSTA-9 with the intention of forwarding  its conclusions for consideration by COP-4.

# ARTICLE 6 OF THE CONVENTION - EDUCATION, TRAINING AND PUBLIC  AWARENESS

On Wednesday, 10 June, delegates considered for the first time  Article 6 of the FCCC -- Education, Training and Public  Awareness. The Chair reported that the Secretariat and UNEP held  a workshop the previous day. The workshop highlighted the scope  for cooperation on public awareness and noted: that public  awareness should not be limited to particular events but should  be part of larger efforts; the need for more effective climate  awareness strategies; the need for Parties to provide more  information on particular awareness building strategies; and  that Article 6 can be operationalized by SBSTA.

UNEP reiterated the importance of public support in the  implementation of the Convention. SRI LANKA and IRAN called for  equal distribution of information packages prepared by CC:INFO  to countries beyond those included in country study programmes.  SWITZERLAND said that the existing information units of the  Secretariat and UNEP should be used to further work under  Article 6 and, with the CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC and IRAN,  called upon the IPCC to provide reports in languages other than  English.

The AFRICAN GROUP, with SRI LANKA and THE GAMBIA, called on  Parties to make resources available for institutional capacity  enhancement and to expand the sphere of African countries  participating in country studies. She said that there was a need  to operationalize Article 6 and expand activities to all facets  of society, and stressed that such activities are neither cheap  nor short term. To this end, she stated that the proposal to  expand the mandate of UNEP is worth considering. Supported by  INDONESIA and CANADA, she called on SBSTA to request the  Secretariat to prepare a paper on work under Article 6 for  consideration at SBSTA-9. She recommended that SBI include a  budget-line for the implementation of Article 6 in funding  proposals as well as for translation of documents; and noted the  importance of timely delivery of resources for the  implementation of education programmes.

The US highlighted work of programmes such as the IGBP-START  (Systems for Analysis Research and Training) and the  coordinating role the Secretariat can play in North-South  exchange of experience. The CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC and CANADA  noted the need for information and expertise sharing and a  resource centre for copyright-free material. The EU called for a  review of the scope of current education programmes and  development of more specific reporting guidelines for this  issue.

The draft conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.2): note the views  expressed by the meeting; call for Parties to fully present  their activities related to this article when submitting their  national communications; and invite Parties to submit by 14  December 1998 their views on possible means of promoting the  implementation of this article as well as proposals on how to  integrate this into SBSTA's work programme. The conclusions were  adopted with some modifications.

# ROSTER OF EXPERTS

On Friday, 5 June, delegates considered the agenda item on the  roster of experts (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/INF.4). CANADA, the UK, the  US and NEW ZEALAND called for regular reviews of the roster as  well as inclusion of gender considerations in the identification  of persons to recommend. In response to a query from ETHIOPIA on  the fate of previous submissions to the roster, the Chair noted  that the compilation was an ongoing process. BOTSWANA stressed  the need for adequate time for notifying and inviting the  experts, and, supported by CHINA, stressed the need for regional  distribution of experts. Draft conclusions of the deliberations  (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/L.4) were adopted.

# SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION

On Tuesday, 2 June, Chair Bakary Kante (Senegal) opened the  first meeting of the SBI. Michael Zammit Cutajar, FCCC Executive  Secretary, noted that 37 countries have signed the Kyoto  Protocol, including Parties representing 39% of Annex I CO2  emissions. The G-77/CHINA called on delegates not to be  distracted from implementing the Convention, noting the second  review of Annex I Party commitments due by December 1998. He  also stressed decisions on new and additional financial  resources and inadequate implementation of previous COP  decisions on technology transfer.

The SBI-8 held nine sessions over the course of the two-week  meeting. The SBI considered the following agenda items: election  of officers other than the Chair; national communications;  financial mechanism; second review of the adequacy of Annex I  Party commitments; amendments to the FCCC annexes; arrangements  for intergovernmental meetings; administrative and financial  matters; and involvement of non-governmental organizations.  Several contact groups met to further discuss issues and draft  conclusions. Several of the contact groups met in closed  sessions, while others were open to NGO attendance. The second  week the Bureau decided that all contact group meetings would be  open unless the group objected.

# ELECTION OF OFFICERS OTHER THAN THE CHAIR

Chair Kante announced Iran's nomination as SBI Vice Chair for  Asia on 2 June. At SBI's closing session on 12 June, he informed  the group that regional coordinators had reached no agreement on  election of officers. He proposed keeping the item under  consideration for SBI-9. Delegates stated their positions on the  issue. On behalf of the Western European and Others Group  (WEOG), AUSTRIA recalled that the Rules of Procedure allow a  second term and called for making use of the experience of  WEOG's candidate for Vice-Chair. She expressed WEOG's  willingness to undertake further consultations.

The PHILIPPINES, on behalf of the Asian Group, and supported by  INDIA, PAKISTAN, CHINA, SAUDI ARABIA, INDONESIA, KUWAIT and  IRAN, stated that, on the election of the Vice-Chair, they had  asked for a guarantee to honor the UN principle of geographical  rotation after the next term, but this had been rejected.

# ANNEX I PARTY COMMUNICATIONS

Delegates began discussion on Annex I Party communications on  Tuesday, 2 June. Three scheduling options for future  communications and review were considered. Many Annex I Parties  favored: lengthening the period between submissions of national  communications; interim electronic reports; and synchronized  reporting. Many favored 2001 for the next communication, but  SWITZERLAND said information on achievement of stabilization by  2000 could not be provided until 2002. The US called for less  emphasis on details of domestic actions or national  circumstances and more time for data collection on emissions  trading and CDM projects. The EU and NEW ZEALAND favored a  fourth national communication deadline of 2005 and a  strengthened reporting process leading to the commitment period  2008-2012. CHINA, with the US, noted COP decisions urging Annex  II Parties to include measures taken for technology transfer.  The Chair invited Parties to submit nominations for a roster of  experts for the in-depth review of Annex I Parties' second  national communications.

Draft conclusions on national communications from Annex I  Parties (FCCC/SBI/1998/CRP.2) were submitted for SBI  consideration on Monday, 8 June. An EU proposal for a draft COP- 4 decision on revised guidelines was not supported. A SWISS  proposal not to limit submission of Parties' views to 'the  scheduling of' subsequent communications was accepted. As  amended, the document calls for Parties who have not done so to  finalize dates of in-depth review visits, submit their annual  national GHG inventory for 1998, and/or submit their second  communications. The document also urges all Parties to take  actions to enlarge the participation of experts from non-Annex I  Parties in the Roster of Experts that will review the  communications, and to submit views on subsequent communications  for consideration by SBI-9.

# NON-ANNEX I COMMUNICATIONS

On Thursday, 4 June, the SBI took up non-Annex I communications.  The Secretariat stated that eight initial communications have  been received, 23 are expected in 1998 and 30 in 1999. The  deadline was March 1998. The EU and others called for a COP-4  decision on in-country expert reviews. The G-77/CHINA  highlighted financial and technical constraints and capacity  building for adaptation. SRI LANKA called for training for  adaptation in all regions. THAILAND noted difficulties with the  adaptation assessment model. GEORGIA and AZERBAIJAN stressed  continuing GEF support. Assistance was requested for: finance  and know-how (MOROCCO); technical needs (BURKINA FASO); longer- term implementation (CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC, ARGENTINA);  vulnerability (ARGENTINA); emission mitigation in other sectors  and formulation of implementation programmes (URUGUAY,  ARGENTINA); and second national communications (SENEGAL,  MEXICO).

The G-77/CHINA reminded UNEP and UNDP that they are implementing  agencies of the operating entity of the financial mechanism.  NIGERIA suggested GEF subregional offices for project  monitoring. BURKINA FASO, THAILAND and AZERBAIJAN called for  translations of guidelines. SENEGAL and ARGENTINA noted  constraints on translation and dissemination of communications.  The EU and AUSTRALIA stressed accelerating submission of initial  communications, assisted by the GEF. UZBEKISTAN stressed  workshops for information exchange for Central Asia. BENIN  requested facilitation of conference attendance for delegates  from Africa.

A contact group, chaired by John Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda) and  Dan Reifsnyder (US), was formed to consider non-Annex I Party  communications as well as review and guidance to the financial  mechanism. On Wednesday, 10 June, Co-Chair Reifsnyder reported  that the contact group had appointed a smaller group to  recommend a decision.

On Friday, 12 June, the Chair introduced documents that note the  views of Parties together with the observations of the  Secretariat (FCCC/SBI/1998/INF.3 and Add.1), including  information on a workshop in Malaysia to assist deliberations.  Contact group Co-Chair Reifsnyder reported that the Co-Chairs  had failed the SBI Chair, having run out of time to reach a  substantive solution. It was decided to continue discussion at  SBI-9.

# REVIEW OF THE FINANCIAL MECHANISM

On Thursday, 4 June, the Chair introduced discussion of the  review of the financial mechanism, noting it must be completed  with a COP-4 decision. On guidance to the GEF, the Chair noted  that new needs have arisen since guidance was provided in 1996.  The G-77/CHINA called for: GEF adherence to COP guidance; no  funding of activities inconsistent with FCCC principles; and,  with EGYPT, attention to adaptation measures. EGYPT called for  long-term sustainability. CHINA called for: a more streamlined  project approval process; transparency in incremental cost  calculation, and, with IRAN, no conditionalities attached to the  activities of multilateral funding institutions, which was  opposed by CANADA.

The EU distinguished GEF review from future guidance; and, with  SWITZERLAND, CANADA and VENEZUELA, proposed making it the  permanent FCCC financing mechanism, subject to future reviews.  SWITZERLAND stressed adequacy and predictability in the flow of  funds. SAUDI ARABIA cautioned against a premature conclusion.  CANADA favored CDM support for adaptation activities. JAPAN  noted its contribution of 20% of GEF funding and called for  extensive evaluation. IRAN criticized a GEF overemphasis on  energies. The Chair asked Dan Reifsnyder (US) and John Ashe  (Antigua and Barbuda) to co-chair a contact group to prepare a  draft decision.

On Friday, 12 June, Co-Chair Reifsnyder stated that the contact  group had not been able to complete its work. The Chair noted  documents on Parties' views on the review of the financial  mechanism and additional guidance to the GEF  (FCCC/SBI/1998/MISC.4 and Add.1) and it was concluded that  further deliberations are needed at SBI-9. Parties are invited  to submit comments to the Secretariat by 15 August 1998, for  compilation and distribution at SBI-9.

# SECOND REVIEW OF THE ADEQUACY OF ANNEX I PARTY COMMITMENTS

On Wednesday, 3 June, SBI began consideration of the second  review of the adequacy of Annex I Party commitments. The G-77/CHINA, supported by many G-77 members and CHINA, said the  Kyoto Protocol was the first step in the review process and  noted that the group was working on a draft decision. The EU  welcomed Kyoto Protocol provisions for a review at COP/MOP-2 and  for initiating consideration of second period commitments.  Noting the desire for increasingly global participation, he said  the EU was ready for discussions with all Parties at COP-4 and  beyond, under FCCC Article 7.2 on regular review of Convention  implementation. He noted an FCCC provision for non-Annex I  Parties to opt for targets.

AUSTRALIA and the EU said all the scientific evidence indicates  that actions by Annex I countries alone would be insufficient.  The US noted findings that this is due to the small number of  Parties involved. SAUDI ARABIA, THE GAMBIA, COLOMBIA, IRAN and  INDIA opposed any consideration of voluntary commitments at COP- 4. The CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC called for a decision on the  adequacy of Annex I commitments before consideration of other  country commitments. IRAN said it is natural to assess new Annex  I commitments.

BURKINA FASO emphasized obligations related to developing  countries, specifically on technology transfer. CHINA, supported  by HUNGARY, called for a review of FCCC implementation, not just  commitments. CANADA said future reviews should cover the effect  of actions by all Parties over time and that SBSTA should  provide scientific and technical information for such a review.  HUNGARY noted many Annex I countries will meet their FCCC  obligations. He opposed deferring SBI consideration of the  review to other bodies. SAUDI ARABIA recommended discussing non- Annex I Parties' commitments only after the Kyoto Protocol  enters into force.

SWITZERLAND said the second review should, inter alia, address  stabilization of GHG emissions by Annex I Parties, and, citing  Article 7.2 (a), said the issue of adequacy should not be  restricted to Annex I Parties. The EU noted that Article 7  discusses review of 'implementation' of the Convention, not just  targets. The US noted that the objective of the Convention  cannot be achieved simply through Article 4.2(a) or (b). CHINA  insisted that Article 7's reference to 'the' Parties does not  include 'all' Parties and warned 'the North' that pushing too  hard risks complete failure.

Discussion continued on Friday, 5 June. The G-77/CHINA,  supported by TOGO, said that: COP-4's second review must respect  the FCCC mandate and not be distracted by extraneous  consideration of new commitments for non-Annex I Parties; COP-4  should convene the next review at the same time as the review at  COP/MOP-2, in accordance with Article 9.2 of the Protocol; and  subsequent reviews should take place in the year preceding the  termination of successive Protocol commitment periods.

The US asked the G-77/CHINA if the intention was to confine  discussion of the second review to that agenda item at COP-4;  and about the timing of future reviews. The G-77/CHINA: said the  second review should be limited to that foreseen in Article 4;  noted it would be logical to hold the next review at the same  time as COP/MOP-2; and indicated flexibility on timing of  subsequent reviews. Referring to newly industrialized countries,  the US expressed interest in exploring ways to move beyond the  static world created by the Annex I list. A way to modify the  Annexes was needed. HUNGARY said the timing of reviews should  not be linked to the unratified Kyoto Protocol.

SAUDI ARABIA recalled the existing FCCC provision for any Party  to undertake Annex I commitments. PERU said the Kyoto Protocol  was a very delicate balance. Raising developing country  commitments at COP-4 would be a danger for the international  community and for the environment. CHINA said the G-77/China  position clearly stated that developing countries would not  accept new commitments under any guise. MEXICO said questions on  OECD membership are inappropriate. VENEZUELA stated that Article  4.2(d) only calls for review of commitments under 4.2(a) and  (b). AOSIS said that Parties should not distract from Protocol  implementation, noting the CDM will assist sustainable growth  with climate protection.

The Chair asked Jennifer Irish (Canada) and Margaret Mukahanana  (Zimbabwe) to co-chair a contact group to prepare a draft  decision. On Wednesday, 10 June, the group presented a draft  conclusion in the name of the Co-Chairs, reflecting different  views (FCCC/SBI/1998/CRP.4). The draft conclusions, inter alia:  reiterate the conclusions of COP-1 that FCCC Article 4.2(a) and  (b) are not adequate; recognize the Kyoto Protocol as an  important step; and note differing views of the G-77/China and  others on the following: whether new commitments by non-Annex I  Parties should be introduced; whether the review should consider  action by all Parties as necessary to meet the objective of the  Convention or just to Article 4.2(a) and (b); and whether the  third review should be carried out at COP/MOP-2 or be determined  by the COP at future sessions. The draft conclusions invite  Parties to submit views by 15 August 1998 to the Secretariat for  compilation by SBI-9.

# AMENDMENTS TO THE FCCC ANNEXES

On Wednesday, 3 June, delegates considered review of information  and possible decisions under Article 4.2(f) (amendments to the  FCCC Annexes). AUSTRALIA, CANADA and the EU requested  information on Turkey's approach to responsibilities. The EU  said all OECD countries should have stated commitments. The US  said any decision on review should include a provision that it  be a regular item on the COP agenda. The Chair requested a draft  decision. Informal consultations undertaken by Amb. Luis Herrera  (Venezuela) did not result in consensus. On 12 June the Chair  proposed and delegates agreed that the SBI mandate continuing  discussions at SBI-9 on Turkey's request to be deleted from the  Annex I and Annex II lists.

# ADVERSE EFFECTS AND IMPACTS OF RESPONSES

On Thursday, 4 June, the SBI took up implementation of Article  4.8 and 4.9 (adverse effects of climate change and impacts of  responses). The Chair noted that consideration of Decision  3/CP.3 and the related Protocol Articles 2.3 and 3.14 had been  added to the agenda item, as requested by COP-3. The Secretariat  introduced the documentation (FCCC/SBI/1998/CRP.1), offering an  analytical framework to facilitate response.

BURKINA FASO called for an ad hoc committee, supported by the  Secretariat, to assess Annex I Party efforts and report to the  COP. The G-77/CHINA, supported by the MARSHALL ISLANDS, called  for SBSTA work on this item and a possible expert meeting before  COP-4. The MARSHALL ISLANDS called for regional workshops on  adaptation. SAUDI ARABIA proposed, inter alia, that: the  Secretariat's analytical framework combine consideration of  adverse effects and impacts; SBI form a permanent committee on  implementation of Articles 4.8 and 4.9; COP-4 request  information from Annex I Parties on policies and measures,  fossil fuel imports during the first commitment period and  estimated effects on other imports from developing countries;  and processes not discriminate against any country clusters  identified in Articles 4.8 and 4.9.

AOSIS stressed the urgency of the question of insurance and,  with the MARSHALL ISLANDS, viewed the additions to the agenda  item title as technical rather than substantive. The EU  supported CDM assistance for adaptation, but stressed a focus on  mitigation. He noted that action on Article 4.8 must await more  certainty on the effects of fossil fuel use, calling for further  discussion. VENEZUELA opposed limiting action to studies and  called for a COP-4 decision. The US asked for more time for  comment. SAUDI ARABIA opposed delaying formation of a contact  group on this.

On Monday, 8 June, the G-77/CHINA, supported by SAUDI ARABIA,  CHINA, INDIA, VENEZUELA and ETHIOPIA, called on the SBI to  identify the needs of developing countries, utilizing the SBSTA  and the IPCC. She called for a contact group to prepare a draft  decision to take the item up at all future COPs and establish a  joint SBI/SBSTA working group. The EU welcomed the Secretariat's  document (FCCC/SBI/1998/CRP.1), and noted, on the paper's  analytical framework, that there was an overstatement of the  certainty of information on adaptation. Possible actions were  not restricted to funding, insurance and technology transfer.  The SBI would not reach definitive conclusions by COP-4 but  could initiate work by SBSTA. The US anticipated dramatic  improvements in the state of knowledge concerning adaptation in  the years ahead. He noted that the FCCC contains no provision  obliging Annex I or Annex II Parties to compensate countries  that could be affected by response measures. Any such obligation  could create a perverse disincentive to reduce GHGs. Instead,  FCCC Article 4.8, on response measures, implies that Parties  should implement commitments while avoiding or minimizing  impacts on developing country Parties.

GEORGIA noted the readiness of many non-Annex I countries to  take on voluntary commitments on GHGs, with adequate support  under Article 4 within the framework of the CDM. A contact group  co-chaired by Tibor Faragó (Hungary) and Mohammad Reza Salamat  (Iran) was formed.

On Tuesday, 9 June, the contact group received a Co-Chairs'  compilation of written inputs from three Parties/regional  groups, along with a draft decision. On 10 June, the contact  group discussed the Co-Chairs' text. The G-77/CHINA proposed  modifications based on its draft decision paper. On the  'analytical framework,' the UK, AUSTRALIA and the US raised a  number of questions. JAPAN cautioned that a reference to  Protocol Articles 2.3 and 3.14 suggested implementation of the  Protocol. On separating the effects of climate change and  impacts of response measures, AUSTRALIA said different modeling  approaches are used. SAUDI ARABIA, supported by the UNITED ARAB  EMIRATES, said the distinction could be made later. The G-77/CHINA proposed alternative language from Decision 3/CP.3 on  undertaking a process. The US bracketed references to Protocol  Articles 2.3 and 3.14. On actions necessary to meet needs and  concerns of developing countries, the US and the EU proposed  following the language of FCCC Article 4.8.

On 11 June, the contact group reconvened to review a Co-Chairs'  compilation together with a G-77/China draft decision paper.  Parties disagreed over the 'considerable uncertainties'  associated with the assessment of adverse effects of climate  change and 'very considerable uncertainties' regarding the  impact of response measures. The US, the EU and AUSTRALIA said  the uncertainties regarding the impact of response measures are  greater.

The G-77/CHINA and the US supported deletion of a paragraph  noting the difficulty in distinguishing between natural and  human-induced climate change. The EU placed it in brackets.

VENEZUELA proposed adding a reference to assisting the COP/MOP-1  in its consideration of the Protocol articles. Alternative  proposals referencing the Protocol were placed in brackets. The  EU, supported by AUSTRALIA, JAPAN and the US, preferred to  replace a  list of information requests with a reference to a  paragraph on identification of effects and impacts.

On 12 June, the SBI considered the Chair's draft conclusions,  which state that the SBI, in response to a COP-3 decision, will  undertake a process to identify and determine actions to  identify the special needs of developing country Parties arising  from the adverse effects of climate change and/or the impacts of  the implementation of response measures. They note that Articles  2.3 and 3.14 of the Kyoto Protocol are also relevant to  considerations of FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9, and that in  accordance with decision 1/CP.3 a joint approach was adopted.  The conclusions also note discussion by the contact group  together with text the contact group did not have time to  consider. The SBI is to continue its consideration of the item  at SBI-9 with a view to recommending a draft decision for  adoption at COP-4.

The Chair noted that discussion on the issue began in 1992. The  US, supported by JAPAN and HUNGARY, proposed, on the linkage  between the FCCC articles and the Protocol provisions, replacing  a reference to 'a joint approach to consideration of the issues'  with a reference to an amendment to the provisional agenda item  under which the Protocol Articles 2.3 and 3.14 were placed in  parentheses. He said the modification would flag the  relationship between the two and leave options open. ZIMBABWE,  on behalf of the G-77/CHINA, said FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9 were  long overdue for implementation. She expressed disappointment at  the lack of progress on reaching agreement and noted a lack of  cooperation. With CHINA, SAUDI ARABIA, INDIA and IRAN, she  regretted the absence of developed country Parties from a  scheduled contact group meeting the previous night. SAUDI ARABIA  reminded Parties that they should consider the progress on all  subjects as a package. They could not expect that developing  countries would proceed on some issues while their interests and  concerns were blocked on others. He proposed that the SBI submit  a request to SBSTA for methodological work in order to help the  work progress at COP-4 and that such a request be attached to  the draft conclusion.

The US objected to G-77/China comments about other Parties' lack  of willingness to discuss the issues. He said the problem on the  previous evening was that so many groups were meeting on  different issues at the same time. His delegation was unable to  cover everything, but he fully expected to engage in the issue  at the next session. He also proposed an amendment to the  Chair's conclusions to reflect agreement in the contact group on  referencing the effects of climate change and/or the impact of  implementation of response measures. On SAUDI ARABIA's proposal,  HUNGARY said the relevant text in the draft conclusion was  unfinished. This could be considered in relation to Saudi  Arabia's request. IRAN suggested that the SBI send a letter to  the SBSTA Chair requesting that he include consideration of  methodological and technical aspects of Articles 4.8 and 4.9 in  his agenda at SBSTA-9. The EU emphasized his understanding of  the concerns of developing countries, particularly those  vulnerable to climate change. On Saudi Arabia's proposal, he  said the draft conclusions contain an invitation to SBSTA  regarding methodological work and this appears in square  brackets. It remains an unresolved issue and it would be wrong  to pre-empt a COP-4 decision. The conclusions were adopted as  amended.

# ARRANGEMENTS FOR INTERGOVERNMENTAL MEETINGS

On Friday, 5 June, the SBI discussed arrangements for  intergovernmental meetings (FCCC/SBI/1998/3). The Executive  Secretary announced Jordan's offer to host COP-5. ARGENTINA  noted ongoing informal consultations on a new proposed item for  COP-4's agenda on voluntary commitments by non-Annex I Parties.  The PHILIPPINES requested a separate item on review of  development and transfer of technologies (Decision 7/CP.2).

On Monday, 8 June, discussion continued on arrangements for COP- 4 and the calendar of meetings. The Chair noted a General  Assembly (GA) resolution asking conferences to avoid conflicts  with GA meetings. After discussion, the Secretariat noted it was  for governments to decide how to address this. On COP-4's  provisional agenda, the US, supported by JAPAN and CANADA, said  the item on voluntary commitments by non-Annex I Parties should  be retained. CHINA, with SAUDI ARABIA and BURKINA FASO, said  this item could lead to renewed confrontation. The G-77/CHINA,  supported by BRAZIL, SAUDI ARABIA and BURKINA FASO, said there  was no group support for an item on voluntary commitments and,  with CHINA, called for transparency in drafting high-level  statements. JAPAN noted a prospective proposal on incentives.  The EU called for a prioritized work programme for Protocol  activities.

On Friday, 12 June, the SBI considered draft conclusions by the  Chair dated 11 June. On the calendar of meetings, a request for  the Bureau to decide on meetings for 1999 at its July session  was opposed by SAUDI ARABIA. The calendar for 1999 will thus  remain the same as for 1998. Changes will be considered for 2000  and beyond at COP-4, and a 12-month calendar will continue to be  used for the time being. On the date and venue of COP-5, the  conclusions note Jordan's offer and a decision to finalize  consideration of the decision at SBI-9, inviting other Parties  to propose venues to the Secretariat by October 1998. On  documentation, the conclusions take note of the Secretariat's  efforts to improve dissemination of information through  electronic media.

# ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL MATTERS

On administrative and financial matters, the Executive Secretary  stated, at the final meeting of the SBI, that the Secretariat  will present an assessment of work implications arising from  COP-3 decisions and other possible future actions. He noted  three options: postpone new work until the next programme budget  period; undertake new work within the current budget by  displacing current work commitments; or obtain new resources for  the new work.

# INVOLVEMENT OF NGOS

The Chair introduced discussion on involvement of NGOs on  Thursday, 4 June, calling for consensus at SBI-8. The US,  opposed by the EU, called for including labor, agriculture, and  quasi-governmental entities. SWITZERLAND extended this to all  Agenda 21 major groups. The US and CANADA opposed exclusion of  NGOs from the contact group on flexibility mechanisms. General  support was expressed for Chair discretion on NGO access to  informal meetings. The CLIMATE ACTION NETWORK asked for a  proposal for additional participation and transparency in  registration. An industry representative called for greater  access to informal meetings with the Chair.

On Monday, 8 June, the Chair introduced his draft conclusions  (FCCC/SBI/1998/CRP.3). The US, with others, deleted a request  for additional information on the objectives of NGOs. The EU  supported existing arrangements accrediting three NGO  constituencies. SAUDI ARABIA, supported by CHINA and VENEZUELA,  proposed that 'Parties' rather than 'Chairmen' agree on NGO  participation in informal contact groups. Delegates accepted a  US compromise allowing participation unless the group objects.  The final paper also requests the Secretariat to continue  consultations with representatives of different NGOs to arrive  at an improved set of NGO constituencies and for improving  availability of documentation to NGOs.

On Friday, 12 June, the Chair proposed amending a paragraph on  the conclusion on NGO participation in the report of the SBI  session to read that representatives of NGOs may be allowed to  participate 'as observers in open-ended' informal contact  groups, unless the Parties object. CHINA, supported by SAUDI  ARABIA and INDIA, and opposed by the US, called for deletion of  'the' before Parties as 'the' implies that all Parties would  have to object to NGO participation before they could be barred.  The US, with CANADA and the EU, said the understanding when the  conclusion was adopted was that contact group Chairs would seek  to determine the sense of the group itself. SAUDI ARABIA  objected, stating that one Party's objection is enough to block  NGO attendance. The US observed that the report was to reflect  what happened when the original conclusions were adopted, not  current discussion. Upon a suggestion by the Executive  Secretary, it was agreed that the subparagraph would be left  unchanged but placed after the other subparagraphs on NGO  participation. It will be immediately followed by a paragraph  saying that the Secretariat is mandated to draft a decision on  this issue for SBI-9 to consider for recommendation to COP-4.  The report was adopted with these amendments.

# SBSTA/SBI JOINT SESSIONS

SBI and SBSTA met jointly three times to consider: activities  implemented jointly (AIJ) under the pilot phase; joint  implementation (JI)(decision 1/CP.3, paragraph 5(c)); the Clean  Development Mechanism (CDM)(decision 1/CP.3, paragraph 5(e));  and emissions trading (decision 1/CP.3, paragraph 5(b)). A  SBSTA/SBI contact group met four times to prepare a draft  decision(s) on: the division of labor for forthcoming SBI and  SBSTA sessions; substantive issues regarding AIJ, JI, the CDM,  and emissions trading; and elaboration of a work programme.

# OPENING STATEMENTS

On 2 and 3 June, the joint SBI/SBSTA sessions heard welcoming  remarks and opening statements. Maria Julia Alsogaray, Secretary  of Natural Resources and Sustainable Development of Argentina,  said that there is a great interest, almost a consensus, on the  early functioning of the CDM and emissions trading. She urged  delegates to develop the elements common to all flexibility  mechanisms together.

UNEP Executive Director Klaus Töpfer pointed to the connection  between flexibility and minimizing repercussions for economic  growth potential. He underlined UNGASS's call for improved  scientific knowledge on the linkage between environmental  conventions, policy coherence and public awareness. He expressed  the hope that his task force could support conventions.

FCCC Executive Director Michael Zammit Cutajar said he had  suggested that the Bureau consider inviting UNEP to offer help  on specific issues with linkages to other processes. He spoke of  an explosion of activities seeking to contribute to the design  of the three new mechanisms envisaged in the Protocol. The  sooner Parties set the basic rules, the sooner economic and  institutional actors could adjust their plans.

SBI Chair Kante recalled that the CDM, emissions trading and  joint implementation are new to the agenda of the subsidiary  bodies. This joint meeting was designed to identify preparatory  work needed for COP-4 and reach agreement on a work schedule.  Key issues to address included identifying questions that can be  resolved by COP-4, and essential areas of work on each  mechanism, such as methodological issues.

The Secretariat introduced the following documents: Mechanisms  for cooperative implementation (FCCC/SB/1998/1); Submissions by  intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations  (FCCC/SB/1998/MISC.2); Submissions from Parties on preparatory  work needed for COP-4 (FCCC/SB/1998/MISC.1); and Update on  activities implemented jointly (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/INF.3).

Delegates made statements on flexibility mechanisms in general,  as well as on specific mechanisms. The G-77/CHINA said the joint  cooperation mechanisms bring about technical, political and  other new uncertainties that must be settled. Many speakers,  including URUGUAY, NICARAGUA and SAUDI ARABIA, cautioned against  spending an inordinate amount of time discussing cooperative  mechanisms, which only serve selected countries.

The AFRICAN GROUP said cooperative implementation should not  overshadow the review of commitments, technology transfer and  capacity building. CHINA warned that the Kyoto Protocol should  not copy the Montreal Protocol. The Kyoto Protocol's  implementation depends on technology and resource transfers to  developing countries. He cautioned against imposing reduction  commitments on developing countries. ZIMBABWE did not anticipate  a final resolution of issues surrounding flexibility mechanisms  at COP-4. INDIA opposed any hierarchy or prioritization of work  with regard to the three collaborative mechanisms.

The EU stressed that Parties must start with domestic action and  said flexibility mechanisms, which must be cost effective and  verifiable, should not create loopholes that weaken the  commitments to be made at COP-4. On the uncertainties  surrounding the new mechanisms, AOSIS called for a non- compliance regime and noted their supplementary role. He noted  the importance AOSIS attaches to adaptation. NORWAY opposed  quantitative caps on the use of flexibility mechanisms. With  COLOMBIA, COSTA RICA and IRAN, he noted they are supplemental to  domestic action. SOUTH AFRICA and IRAN noted that COP-4 cannot  finalize work on setting modalities and guidelines for the  mechanisms. SLOVENIA reiterated the urgency of action, calling  for proposed working groups to provide sufficient input to COP- 4.

AUSTRALIA, supported by RUSSIA, called for cost-effective  mechanisms and said that credits should be transferable across  the three mechanisms for the achievement of the Protocol's aims.  ARGENTINA stressed the importance of setting COP-4's priorities  and suggested moving on those issues, such as the CDM, where  consensus has been achieved.

### EMISSIONS TRADING

On emissions trading, the EU said the  adoption and ratification of a compliance regime is a  prerequisite for emissions trading, as is careful consideration  of risk-sharing between buyers and sellers. The US favored a  simple set of rules for emissions trading and specified, inter  alia, that no formal trading should occur until the Protocol  enters into force. A Party should not be able to sell once it  has emitted its allowed amounts during any period, i.e.,  'deficit trading.' He opposed limiting the percentages that can  be sold. NEW ZEALAND called for early decisions on transparent  emissions trading to harness economic efficiency to the  achievement of environmental goals, backed by a firm compliance  regime. He objected to a proposal for ceilings on amounts  traded. The REPUBLIC OF KOREA and NIGERIA stressed that  emissions trading should supplement national reductions and  cautioned that rules to govern it must be defined in advance to  avoid compliance and verification problems. CHINA noted that  emissions trading is illegal until the COP defines relevant  rules, principles, and guidelines. Supporting emissions trading,  RUSSIA said the Russian people had paid a very high price for  'hot air' by reducing their living standards.

CANADA tabled a discussion paper on principles, modalities,  rules and guidelines for an international emissions trading  regime on behalf of Australia, Canada, Iceland, Japan, New  Zealand, Norway, Russia and the US. The tradable unit would be  Assigned Amount Units (AAUs). AAUs would be denominated in 'CO2  equivalent' and would express one metric tonne of CO2 equivalent  emissions. Each Annex B Party could issue serialized AAUs from  its 'assigned amounts.' AAUs would be valid until used to offset  emissions for the purposes of contributing to compliance.  Parties could trade directly and/or authorize legal entities to  acquire and or transfer AAUs. Each Annex B Party would need to  comply with Protocol Article 5 (national emission estimation  systems) and Protocol Article 7 (emissions inventories). They  must also establish and maintain a national system for recording  their 'assigned amounts' and tracking AAUs held, transferred or  acquired. Each Party would also be required to report annually  on activities and be assessed on compliance at the end of the  commitment period.

### CLEAN DEVELOPMENT MECHANISM

On the CDM, the EU noted the need  to agree on: what contribution the CDM can make to Annex I  QELROs; the operational entities of the CDM; and the form and  identity of the various institutions established under Article  12 of the Protocol. He emphasized that this article does not  refer to removals by sinks and suggested that the CDM should not  apply to sinks unless the COP/MOP decides otherwise. The US  stressed it was premature to limit the extent to which CDM  activities may account for emissions limitation and cautioned  against the chilling effect of administrative restrictions. The  G-77/CHINA expressed alarm at interpretations of the CDM as a  clean production mechanism or a global carbon fund. He opposed  having any entity outside the FCCC operate the CDM.

GEORGIA cautioned that the CDM, in its current form, makes  developing countries dependent on the will of developed  countries and said there is a need for financial resources to  assist developing countries. MAURITIUS emphasized the CDM for  poverty alleviation and ETHIOPIA called for elaboration on this  at COP-4. With COLOMBIA, COSTA RICA, SLOVENIA, SENEGAL, NIGERIA  and IRAN, NORWAY called the CDM a tool for sustainable  development in non-Annex I countries that should also contribute  to climate change objectives. He said additional time is needed  for inclusion of sinks in the CDM. Supported by SAUDI ARABIA,  INDIA noted that the CDM's origins are in sustainable  development through development cooperation and resource  transfer.

COLOMBIA and VENEZUELA recommended that CDM projects, inter  alia, produce real emissions reductions and, with COSTA RICA,  accord with host country wishes. Supported by COSTA RICA,  NICARAGUA, ARGENTINA and IRAN, COLOMBIA opposed ignoring sinks,  noting that they are also biodiversity deposits. COSTA RICA also  opposed re-negotiation on what kinds of sinks are included. The  REPUBLIC OF KOREA expressed reservations about the inclusion of  forestry under the CDM and cautioned against the temptation to  micromanage the CDM through extended bureaucracies. IRAN  distinguished the CDM from other mechanisms, pointing out that  it is a multilateral rather than bilateral mechanism, with  international supervision. He cautioned against turning the CDM  into a clean energy mechanism. URUGUAY called for further  definition and contact group discussions.

### ACTIVITIES IMPLEMENTED JOINTLY

On AIJ and JI, the AFRICAN  GROUP, supported by SOUTH AFRICA, noted that African countries  have neither participated in AIJ nor received funding because  donors seem to prefer other regions. Several countries, such as  BURKINA FASO, NIGERIA and the CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC, stressed  the need to wait until the end of the AIJ pilot phase before  drawing conclusions on its viability. IRAN favored continuation  of the AIJ pilot phase and development of guidelines. The US  said that projects begun under AIJ that lead to legitimate  emissions reductions should receive credits. The EU said the AIJ  experience gained since COP-1 can provide valuable guidance on  questions of flexibility mechanisms in the Protocol.

# CONTACT GROUP ON MECHANISMS

Delegates agreed to discuss the mechanisms in a contact group  chaired by Yvo de Boer (Netherlands) and Gylvan Meira Filho  (Brazil). On Monday, 8 June, Co-Chair de Boer reported in a  joint SBI/SBSTA Plenary that the group had met three times to:  identify issues related to the mechanisms; consider a work  programme; and suggest decisions. The group mandated a Co- Chairs' paper submitted as a proposed schedule of work. The G-77/CHINA, supported by the PHILIPPINES, SAUDI ARABIA and CHINA,  called upon SBSTA to clarify methodological issues before  substantive issues are discussed. He also: noted, with CHINA,  the G-77/CHINA's current consideration of this item; called for  consideration of rules, guidelines and modalities and other  relevant issues; and, with the PHILIPPINES, opposed establishing  another contact group on similar issues. The Chair urged that  the two groups' work be harmonized. The EU introduced a proposal  on international emissions trading, noting differences from the  Canadian proposal in addressing: supplementarity; environmental  effectiveness, compliance mechanisms, market transparency, risk  and liability rules, reporting requirements, and eligibility.

On 10 June, the contact group met to discuss a Co-Chairs' draft  proposed schedule on mechanisms. The G-77/CHINA presented an  initial list of issues to address, and stressed consideration of  fundamental issues before timing and schedules of work. NORWAY,  on behalf of a group of countries and supported by the US,  recalled the non-paper on emissions trading distributed by the  group the previous week, and the package of four mechanisms  agreed in Kyoto. He stressed that quantitative caps, which could  lead to fewer developing country projects, had not been adopted  in Kyoto. Referring to its non-paper, the EU stressed domestic  actions and called for: ceilings on use of mechanisms;  guidelines, rules and procedures; a compliance regime as a  prerequisite; and parallel work on the three mechanisms. The US  suggested basing group discussions on both the G-77/China  questions and the Co-Chairs' draft proposed schedule.

In the evening, delegates received the G-77/CHINA's proposed  work programme on mechanisms. Discussion of its elements took  place that evening and the following day. The G-77/CHINA  suggested deferring AIJ until after the pilot phase designated  at COP-1.

Countries were limited to volunteering proposals for additional  elements and questions for clarification. For CDM and Article 6  projects, delegates considered elements under  methodological/technical work, institutional issues, process and  linkages, as well as participation in projects under the CDM.  For emissions trading between Annex I Parties, delegates  considered general issues.

On emissions trading, the US questioned the inclusion of  language on rights and entitlements of Annex I Parties. The G-77/CHINA commented that 'rights' are included in the literature  on domestic common property resource trading schemes and in the  FCCC regarding the right to develop. The EU and the US stated  that entitlements for trading have already been established  under the Kyoto Protocol. The US said it is not 'rights' but  'assigned amounts' that are discussed in the Protocol, and that  the emissions and allocations of non-Annex I Parties will only  be addressed in the longer term when they participate. He  invited discussion on this. Several delegates questioned the  inclusion of language on funding of adaptation in the G-77/China's paper.

Additional elements were proposed by Annex I Parties, including  SWITZERLAND, the EU, the US, CANADA, AUSTRALIA and NEW ZEALAND.  Under emissions trading, new text covered, inter alia,  involvement of legal entities and verification, reporting and  accountability with regard to principles, modalities, rules and  guidelines. Under the other topics additions were proposed on  such topics as: review of implementation of Article 6 by expert  review teams; methodological issues surrounding additionality;  guidelines for projects and project baselines on sinks; an  overall institutional framework; Executive Board supervision;  and accessibility of participation. A proposal for guidelines on  the eligibility of projects initiated under the AIJ pilot phase  for generation of emissions reduction units was opposed by the  G-77/CHINA. The Chair proposed to prepare a set of 'Chairs'  personal notes' based on the discussion.

In the evening, Chair Meira Filho recalled that work remained on  linkages under the CDM and Article 6. Delegates received a  revised proposal on the work programme on mechanisms  incorporating additions from the morning session, accompanied by  'Chairs' personal notes.' The EU sought clarification on whether  issues mentioned the day before would be reflected in the  proposed work programme. The US queried the status of the new  paper and objected to the Chair's suggestion that no new items  or categories should be added. Noting efforts to provide  flexibility, the US said he could not accept the paper as a  consensus document. The Chair clarified that due to time  constraints the contact group could not wait for consideration  of the issues raised by the US, and proposed addressing them in  the next session. The US objected to the Chair's proposal,  saying all ideas must be presented in a complete way.

SAUDI ARABIA noted the efforts made by the G-77/China and  stressed that other issues must be considered. He said that all  the issues are a package and progress on one issue cannot be  expected while others are blocked. The US expressed  disappointment that the G-77/China position paper  (FCCC/SB/1998/MISC.1/Add.5) had just emerged as a document. He  called for a break to study it.

Following several breaks, the Chair proposed to take into  account all comments discussed and prepare a Co-Chairs' report  with a section on personal notes and on the proposed work  programme, including new submissions. The paper would have no  legal status and would not be subject to editing. He requested  the group to allow the Co-Chairs to conclude this and only show  the outcome to representatives of the G-77/China, the EU, the  US, Saudi Arabia and any interested Parties before presenting it  to the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies.

On 12 June, Co-Chair de Boer reported on the work of the contact  group, which resulted in two documents (contained in  FCCC/SB/198/CRP.2), a set of 'suggested elements for a work  programme on mechanisms' and the Chairs' draft conclusions. He  noted that the conclusions invite Parties to submit views on the  mechanisms, noting that submissions received by the Secretariat  by 10 September can be distributed at the next meeting as  'miscellaneous' documents. The suggested elements for a Work  Programme are a compilation of the G-77/China's proposal and  proposals by other Parties made during the contact group  meetings and further proposals submitted by the EU, Canada and  others on emissions trading.

The EU expressed satisfaction with the outcome of the contact  group and noted two papers the EU had tabled since the last  meeting (contained in FCCC/SB/1998/MISC.1/Add.6). One contains  preliminary views of the EU and Switzerland on the G-77's  questions discussed earlier in the contact group. The second, a  non-paper on joint implementation submitted on behalf of the EU,  Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Latvia, Poland,  Slovakia, Slovenia and Switzerland, gives views on the  principles to apply to joint implementation, including:  additionality, supplementarity, transparency, eligibility and  compliance, and includes a draft decision proposed by the group  for consideration at COP-4.

INDIA, on behalf of the G-77/CHINA, expressed satisfaction  regarding the deliberations related to the mechanisms. He noted  that delegates were able to synthesize perspectives, identify  issues and propose a work programme. Developing countries are  much wiser because they know more about the uncertainties that  must be understood before the mechanisms can proceed to the next  stage.

# CONTACT GROUP ON ALLOCATION OF WORK

On allocation of work for future sessions under Decision 1/CP.3,  paragraph 6, SWITZERLAND, on behalf of Co-Chair José Romero  (Switzerland), reported that the contact group met three times.  Although Parties expressed views that were compiled into a  Chair's draft paper, the contact group was unable to finish its  work on the agenda item at a third meeting due to non-attendance  by official representation from the G-77/China. INDONESIA  reported that the G-77/China felt it was premature to try to  decide the organization of work until after work on mechanisms  and review of adequacy of commitments under FCCC 4.2(a) and (b)  is finished, because task allocation requires a complete list of  tasks and at this stage it may not be exhaustive. The Chair's  draft conclusions (FCCC/SB/1998/CRP.1) were adopted. The  document states that the subsidiary bodies decided to defer  consideration of these items until their ninth sessions and  invited the Chairs of SBI and the SBSTA to formulate points that  might provide a basis for deliberations at that time.

# CLOSING SBI/SBSTA JOINT PLENARY

On 12 June, SBSTA Chair Kok Kee Chow (Malaysia) noted there had  been many doubts voiced regarding the ability to make progress,  but noted that this session resulted in the basic building  blocks to move forward on important issues. He urged delegates  to 'see the glass as half full rather than half empty.' SBI  Chair Bakary Kante (Senegal) said that delegates had started a  process that, while interesting, cannot be completed at once.  Following the adoption of all conclusions, delegates adopted the  draft report of the session (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/L.1).

CANADA spoke on behalf of the countries that jointly submitted  an emissions trading proposal. He expressed appreciation for the  G-77/China's questions and favored an early opportunity to  provide preliminary responses. NEW ZEALAND expressed its intent  to make a submission on mechanisms.

INDONESIA, on behalf of the G-77/CHINA, said that all mechanisms  must be examined on the basis of equity, sustainable development  and the objective of the Convention. The issue related to the  CDM must be addressed first. On arrangements for COP-4, he said  the High-Level Segment must not be bound by any declaration  originating in any body or meeting extraneous to COP-4. On  technology transfer, he expressed concern at the lack of  progress, despite relevant provisions of the Convention and  decisions adopted at the three previous COPs. On the second  review of FCCC Article 4.2(d), he reiterated that there must be  no new commitments, voluntary or introduced for all developing  countries, under any guise. On the financial mechanism, he said  the group was not getting the necessary cooperation on  improvement and functioning of the operating entity on an  interim basis. On adverse impacts of response measures, he  expressed disappointment The CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC stressed the need to help countries  presently lacking technical capacity and said delegates must  contemplate ways to advance developing countries' understanding.  ARGENTINA thanked all participants for their diligent work and  expressed confidence that COP-4 would be a resounding success.

# A BRIEF ANALYSIS OF THE MEETINGS

'The Bumpy Road to Buenos Aires - Time for a Mandate?' After the colorful displays of prowess, endurance and dexterity  at 'the big game' in Kyoto, some delegations in Bonn found  themselves drawn to the Piano Bar at the Maritim Hotel to  recapture a sense of purpose and excitement by viewing the  opening games of the World Cup displayed on a life-size screen.  Participants at the first post-Kyoto subsidiary body meetings in  Bonn encountered a distinct and worrying loss of momentum  caused, in part, by unresolved negotiation of the priorities for  the COP-4 agenda in Buenos Aires. Moreover, some key issues for  discussion have generated at least two 'world views' around  their meaning and significance. This brief analysis will limit  itself to an examination of the factors which have slowed the  negotiating process and an attempt to identify some of the  ingredients required for a decisive COP-4 in Buenos Aires.

# A LOSS OF MOMENTUM

The immediate agenda for the subsidiary bodies was set, for the  most part, by Decision 1/CP.3 of COP-3 which directed the Chairs  of the SBI and SBSTA to provide guidance to the Secretariat on  the preparatory work needed for consideration by COP-4 and to  allocate work to the respective subsidiary bodies. The  'flattening of momentum' observed in Bonn was attributed to the  decision's failure to provide guidance on what 'must' be done at  COP-4. In Kyoto and Bonn, Parties not only failed to reach a  consensus around priorities but continued to attach very  different expectations to issues that may or may not appear on  the agenda in Buenos Aires. Consider, for example, the second  review of the adequacy of commitments under FCCC Article 4.2 (a)  and (b). The date of COP-4 was, in part, determined by the  provision in Article 4.2(d) for a second review to be held not  later than 31 December 1998. In a move that puzzled some  observers, it was a number of developing countries who pushed  for the second review, viewing it as an opportunity for a  rehearsal of their argument that Annex I Parties have failed to  adequately 'implement' their commitments.

The G-77/China told the SBI that COP-4's second review must  respect the FCCC mandate and not be distracted by extraneous  matters such as consideration of new commitments for non-Annex I  Parties. The articles, however, can also be viewed as a hook  upon which to build a case for developing country participation.  The US and others adopt this view, based on an interpretation of  the second review process which holds that the inadequacy of the  articles per se (not implementation) is due to the limited  number of Parties subject to the kind of commitments outlined in  Articles 4.2(a) and (b). Incidentally, the European Union shares  this reading of Articles 4.2 (a) and (b) but is also examining  the possibility of using FCCC Article 7.2, which encompasses  review of FCCC-related legal instruments, to press for  increasingly global participation. The logic of the US reading  of inadequacy shores up their interest in exploring ways to move  beyond what it calls the 'static world' created by the  establishment of Annex I and make a case for bringing the newly  industrialized countries on board.

Another example of opposing interpretations involves Articles  4.8 and 4.9 on the effects of climate change and the adverse  impacts of response measures. Oil exporting countries, supported  by AOSIS, are pressing for increased and, perhaps, equal weight  to be given to any adverse social, economic and physical impacts  arising from implementation of FCCC commitments. Annex I  countries are more cautious, pointing out that much more  scientific work will have to be done before these issues are  dealt with side by side, if ever.

What does a United States Senator want? The US can be expected  to continue pushing the envelope on the 'meaningful  participation' of key developing countries on a number of  fronts. One of these fronts might be an attempt to review the  FCCC Annex I list, with the argument that the world has moved  on, notably for newly industrializing countries, since the list  was first formulated. To borrow a phrase from Sigmund Freud, the  question comes down to this: What does a United States Senator  want? It has been reported that US Senators believe that India,  China and Mexico will determine whether the US will ratify the  Kyoto Protocol.

The US is also behind one of the most intriguing questions on  the road to Buenos Aires. The host country for COP-4, Argentina,  is considering 'voluntarily' taking on emissions commitments.  When the proposed Article 10, on voluntary commitments, was  dropped from the draft Protocol at the final meeting of the  Committee of the Whole (COW) in Kyoto, Argentina asked for the  item to be included on the COP-4 agenda. The proposal was lost  after opposition from Saudi Arabia and China on the grounds that  it was not an issue the COW could take up. Argentina mistakenly  thought that its motion had succeeded and it was not until  things were clarified by the FCCC Secretariat earlier this year  that the country repeated its request to place voluntary  commitments on COP-4's provisional agenda, in writing. Argentina  consulted widely at the subsidiary body meetings to find an  agreed formulation but faced overwhelming opposition within the  G-77. There is speculation that the item will appear at the top  of COP-4's agenda with a view to it being dropped in return for  concessions on an alternative approach to the same issue.  Towards the close of the Bonn meeting the host country's  representatives were reportedly more occupied by the failure of  the COP-4 agenda to take shape, and the prospect of a 'non- event' graced by the less than dignified presence of a coterie  of the world's ministers twiddling their thumbs.

One alternative approach to voluntary commitments (based on  identifying incentives), suggested by a leading player, could  focus on research such as that conducted by the World Resources  Institute demonstrating that developing countries are already  making efficiency gains using new technologies, qualifying them  for claims on their 'emissions forgone.' Complex meeting without a center: The insubstantial outcome of  the subsidiary body meetings cannot be attributed entirely to  the important political disputes. This was the first meeting  since the end of the AGBM where the burden of complex work fell  entirely to the subsidiary bodies. As one observer commented:  'The Bonn meeting did not have a center.' Reflecting this view  that the meeting lacked an adequate equivalent to a Plenary  (despite joint meetings of the two subsidiary bodies), there  were complaints that insufficient time was given to exchange  views on, for example, each of the flexibility mechanisms, in  advance of going into contact groups. A European delegate said,  'The contact groups subsequently did not get into the issues.  There wasn't much progress on questions such as the allocation  of work. Many of the contact groups met for a few days and then  stopped. Now we have an awful lot to do if we are to solve any  of the outstanding issues.' Complexity itself has begun to close in on the delegations and  the Secretariat as an issue, compounding the political  differences as Parties move from the 'what' questions of the  AGBM process to the daunting 'how' questions (some 324 meetings,  including special events, took place over the two weeks) around  implementing the Kyoto Protocol and its mechanisms. The climate  change phenomenon confronts the tradition of multilateral  negotiation, consensus building and co-operation with  unprecedented challenges. A modest proposal to tackle this may  involve three meetings during the year, with the subsidiary  bodies meeting twice, one week at a time.

The complexity issue probably helps to explain the all too  common story reported by those delegates who returned from Kyoto  to their capitals to find more and more of their government  ministries taking an interest in the outcome. Ministries are  reporting that they are increasingly overwhelmed by the enormity  of the implications of the Kyoto Protocol. On their return to  the fray in Bonn some delegations were well aware that many  things had been left unresolved in the run up to and at Kyoto  while others were more laid back, treating the subsidiary bodies  as a re-run of AGBM-1. The actual atmosphere reflected a clash  of both attitudes, with combinations of blocking tactics and an  unwillingness by some Parties to talk about some issues at all.

Who wants what? For Annex I Parties anxious to make progress for  the entry into force, the preferred package of outcomes from  COP-4 is shaped by their requirements for ratification, such as  the flexibility mechanisms. The EU and the economies in  transition are also interested in developing the framework for  joint implementation. The US and New Zealand are pursuing early  decisions on emissions trading. For the developing countries  there is interest in the new mechanisms such as the CDM and the  second review of adequacy of FCCC commitments. In addition there  was a strong push for technology transfer and an emphasis on  Articles 4.8 and 4.9 by oil-exporting countries and AOSIS,  something which took the FCCC Secretariat by surprise. Contrary  to appearances, the issue of the GEF has been described by one  insider as a 'dead horse.' These packages are likely to converge  around the 'trade offs' on progress on flexibility mechanisms in  favor of Annex I countries and concessions on the push for a  schedule for developing country commitments in favor of most  Annex II Parties, at least for the time being. In Bonn the  development of positions and lack of movement on some fronts  clearly signaled a desire by Parties to create a stock of  bargaining chips to begin trading in Buenos Aires.

### WHITHER THE G-77 & THE EU'S BURDEN

Intra-group dynamics and  their impact on negotiations are also being discussed.  Reflecting on the diverse positions within the G-77, one  of the  group's delegates noted that in the long run, the regional sub- groups would have to find ways of articulating their specific  interests separately. A split in G-77 is not imminent since the  group represents other interests beyond the climate forum.  However, more articulated and clearer regional positions may  become apparent at the next COP and probably would be the most  feasible way to achieve progress.

European negotiators and observers were preoccupied with  imminent internal negotiations on burden sharing within the  'bubble' arrangement. A small number of countries are expected  to take on the lion's share of the burden, creating a very wide  gap between the high achievers and the rest. NGOs have  speculated that the lack of balance in the burden sharing deal  could impact on the Union's positions on flexibility and  policies and measures. For example, one NGO suggested that an  uneven spread of commitments could undermine the incentive  within the less ambitious European countries to accept the kind  of common policies and measures required by more ambitious  countries.

# PREPARING TO GIVE AND TAKE?

Movement, or the lack of it, on a number of key issues will  determine the success of the COP-4 agenda. Land use change and  forestry are not specifically mentioned in either Article 6 (JI)  or Article 12 (CDM). Therefore, it remains unclear whether they  will be included as potential projects for meeting reduction  commitments. This has proved to be a highly complex and divisive  issue, even among the NGOs. A question remains about whether a  special report requested from the IPCC will be ready for COP-6  in 2000. This is significant because according to Article 12,  Annex I countries may begin to accrue certified emissions  reductions starting in that year. Therefore, it is likely that  the US and CANADA will be pushing for early resolution.  Emissions trading is another hot topic. UNEP Executive Director  Klaus Töpfer has described this component of the Protocol as the  'creation of a new property rights regime for a global resource  - the atmosphere' leading to a concern among both NGOs and some  delegations that key actors have become increasingly preoccupied  with managing targets and manipulating the numbers at the  expense of efforts to seriously address efforts to achieve  significant parts of their reduction targets at home. The EU, a  supporter of capping, is concerned that the '21st century carbon  rush' may fail to convince developing countries that Annex I  Parties are serious about their commitment to take a lead on  climate change mitigation.

Creating a goal-oriented COP-4 There will be opportunities at a number of intersessional  activities, including high-level meetings in Canada, Japan and  Argentina, for key Parties to refine their respective agendas in  advance of COP-4. Perhaps out of a sense of 'AGBM nostalgia,'  some are mooting the possibility of a Buenos Aires Mandate to  restore momentum and create deadlines for this new phase in the  negotiations. Deadlines can, in a sense, become 'star players'  in a negotiating process and may help to assuage the fears of  those who believe that urgent decisions may be left to COP-5,  allowing the all important date for the Protocol's entry into  force to drift to the sidelines. There may be truth in this. It  will also be worth remembering, however, that the content of the  issues at stake has also shifted towards greater complexity and  deeper uncertainty in the post-Kyoto phase. After Kyoto the  future is not what it used to be.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR

### THIRD CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE FCCC

The Third  Conference of the Parties will be held in Buenos Aires,  Argentina, from 2-13 November 1998. The ninth sessions of SBI  and SBSTA are expected to meet during the first week. A High- Level Segment will be held from 12-13 November. Canada and Japan  announced plans to hold intersessional meetings in September.  For more information contact the FCCC Secretariat in Bonn,  Germany; tel: +49-228-815-1000; fax:+49-228-815-1999; e-mail:  secreariat@unfccc.de. Also try the FCCC home page at  http://www.unfccc.de and UNEP's Information Unit for Conventions  at http://www.unep.ch/iuc/.

### FOURTH INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON GREENHOUSE GAS CONTROL  TECHNOLOGIES (GHGT-4)

This conference will be held from 30  August - 2 September 1998 in Interlaken, Switzerland. For  information contact: Dr. Baldur Eliasson, Head, Energy and  Global Change, ABB Corporate Research Ltd., Baden-Dättwil ,  Switzerland.; tel: +41-56-486 80 31; fax: +41-56-493 45 69; e- mail: baldur.eliasson@chcrc.abb.ch.

### SECOND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CLIMATE AND HISTORY

The  Second International Conference on Climate and History: 'Past  and present variability - a context for the future,' will be  held from 7-11 September 1998 in Norwich, UK. For more  information contact: Susan Boland, Climatic Research Unit, Univ.  of East Anglia, Norwich, NR4 7TJ, UK; tel: +44-1603-456-161;  fax: +44-1603-507-784; e-mail: s.boland@uea.ac.uk; Internet:  http://www.cru.uea.ac.uk/cru/conf.

### CONGRESS OF THE WORLD ENERGY COUNCIL

This meeting will be held  from 13-17 September 1998 in Houston, Texas, US. For more  information contact: The Houston Congress; tel: +1 (202) 331- 0415; fax: +1 (202) 331-0418; Internet:  http://www.wec98congress.org/.

### ELEVENTH WORLD CLEAN AIR & ENVIRONMENT CONGRESS (& EXPO)

The  Congress is schedule from 13-18 September 1998 in Durban, South  Africa. For information contact: Conference Secretariat, PO Box  36782, Menlo Park 0102, South Africa; fax: +27 12 460 170; e- mail: wissing@iafrica.com.

SIXTH INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON MODELING, MONITORING AND  MANAGEMENT OF AIR POLLUTION (Air Pollution '98): This meeting  will be held from 28-30 September 1998 in Genova, Italy. The  meeting will be organized by the Wessex Institute of Technology  (UK) and the Universita di Genova, Italy. The objective of this  meeting is to bring together scientists working in industry,  research organizations, government and academia who are working  on monitoring, simulation and management of air pollution  problems. For information contact: Sally Radford, Conference  Secretariat, Air Pollution 98, WIT; tel: +44 (0) 1703 293223;  fax: +44 (0) 1703 292853; e-mail: sradord@wessex.ac.uk

### INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON TROPICAL FORESTS AND CLIMATE CHANGE

This meeting will be held from 19-22 October 1998, Manila, the  Philippines. For more information contact the Conference  Secretariat, Environmental Forestry Program, UPLB College of  Forestry, 4031 College, Laguna, the Philippines; tel: +63-49- 536-2342; fax: +63-49-536-2341; e-mail:  Rdl@mudspring.uplb.edu.ph.

1998 EARTH TECHNOLOGIES FORUM (formerly Climate Change  Conferences and Ozone Protection Technologies Conference): This  meeting will be held from 26-28 October 1998 in Washington, DC.  The Forum will address climate change and ozone protection  technologies and policies. It is co-sponsored by the  International Climate Change Partnership (ICCP), the US  Environmental Protection Agency and the Alliance for Responsible  Atmospheric Policy. The conference will provide a forum for  discussion of current technologies and efforts to bring them  into the marketplace. It also offers an opportunity to learn  more about the important linkage between technology issues and  policy discussions prior to COP-4. For conference registration,  programme and exhibit information contact: Heather Tardel; tel:  +1 (703) 807-4052; fax: +1 (703) 243-2874; Internet:   http://www.earthforum.com.