---
title: "HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE MEETINGs of the FCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES 28 JULY 1997"
id: enb1247e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1247e
date: 1997-07-28
abstract: "The sixth session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and  Technological Advice (SBSTA) discussed the division of  labor between SBSTA and the Subsidiary Body for  Implementation (SBI) and methodological issues. SBI began  consideration of the Programme Budget for 1998-99. The Ad  Hoc Group on Article 13 discussed a compilation text on  functions and procedures for any multilateral consultative  mechanism (MCP). Informal groups met to hear Secretariat  presentations on methodological issues and the Programme  Budget."
---

# SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE  SBSTA

Chair Tibor Fargaro (Hungary) highlighted the  interest in enhancing commitments under the FCCC as  expressed at the UN General Assembly Special Session  (UNGASS). He noted that Burundi had recently become an FCCC  Party and said the Ukraine and Singapore would soon do  likewise. FCCC Executive Secretary Michael Zammit-Cutajar  noted that while much attention has focused on the AGBM,  the other subsidiary bodies would also make positive  contributions to COP-3. Each subsidiary body should strive  to produce draft decisions that can be easily adopted at  COP-3. He expressed concern at the slow pace of submission  of national communications, which are a basic commitment  and affect the Secretariat's ability to compile and  synthesize information.

On the adoption of the agenda, TANZANIA, on behalf of the  G-77/CHINA, reserved its position on addressing  methodological issues related to joint implementation as a  separate issue. CHINA proposed bracketing the item. The US  requested an explanation of this action. The Chair proposed  including this item under the general discussion on  activities implemented jointly. Delegates agreed to  consider the item under the discussion on methodological  issues.

On the election of officers, Soobaraj Sok Appadu  (Mauritius) was elected Vice-Chair and Alvaro Jose  Rodriguez Gómez (Colombia) as Rapporteur. On the  organization of work, the Chair proposed establishing  informal groups to consider the division of labor between  SBSTA and SBI. He also proposed establishing a group on  methodological issues, to be chaired by Harald Dovland  (Norway) and SBSTA Vice-Chair Appadu. Thirty-four  delegations expressed interest in participating.

Division of Labor: The Secretariat introduced the document  on division of labor (FCCC/SB/1997/2). The document  proposes, inter alia, that only one subsidiary body address  any particular issue and, if necessary, the other body  would consider certain aspects of the issue. LUXEMBOURG, on  behalf of the EU, along with JAPAN, supported the proposed  approach and, with SWITERLAND, emphasized the need for  education and public awareness. JAPAN noted that the  division of labor for national communications and AIJ needs  clarification. The US noted that SBSTA should only refine  unclear areas rather than redefine decisions.

Some delegations, including MALAYSIA, SAUDI ARABIA and IRAN  emphasized the importance of technology transfer to  developing countries and the need for more detailed  discussions. Some disagreed with the document's proposal  that SBI only address technology transfer 'at some point in  the future.' CANADA noted that some elements are  appropriate to SBSTA's expertise, while others fall outside  that, such as intellectual property rights, financial  mechanisms and the role of the private sector. An informal  group will consider the issue.

Methodological Issues: The Chair opened discussion on  methodological issues and financing by noting that an  informal group would also meet in conjunction with SBSTA.  He urged delegates to limit their discussion to general  comments on the documents (FCCC/SB/1997/INF.2,  FCCC/SBI/1997/10 and FCCC/SB/1997/INF.1) and leave detailed  discourse for the informal discussions. The EU, the US and  JAPAN stated that the documents were reasonable and useful.  However, each group stated reservations and agreed to  participate in informal discussions. The EU and the US  looked forward to more discussion concerning the budget and  questioned how funding should be allocated to different  bodies. MALAYSIA noted the importance of methodological  issues and called for an increase in the budget. CHINA  called for the work to be implemented on a regional basis  and stressed that this should be a priority task.

In the afternoon, the Chair called for comments on  methodological issues related to crediting under  prospective joint implementation. The US and the EU  supported immediate discussion of this matter and said that  joint implementation would be limited without resolving the  issue of credits. The G-77/CHINA and the RUSSIAN FEDERATION  noted that it was premature to talk about crediting. They  emphasized that joint implementation is still in its pilot  phase, with few projects and few countries involved. NORWAY  emphasized that the issue of crediting is complex and  addressing methodology alone may not be beneficial. They  called for a broad examination of the issue before the  specifics of methodology are considered.

The Chair called for a compromise and suggested postponing  discussion of crediting until early next year in order to  await the political deliberations that will take place at  AGBM. CANADA noted that each COP is responsible for the  review of pilot projects and was concerned that the issue  of crediting was being ignored. The Chair called on the US,  NORWAY, CANADA and CHINA to draft a compromise text for  consideration in Plenary on Wednesday, 30 July.

National Communications: The Secretariat introduced  documents on communications from Annex I Parties  (FCCC/SB/1997/5) and inventory and projection data  (FCCC/SB/1997/6), which delegates noted without discussion.  On non-Annex I Parties, delegates agreed to await the  outcome of SBI deliberations, which will address  assistance.

Activities Implemented Jointly: The Secretariat introduced  a document on activities implemented jointly (AIJ) under  the pilot phase (FCCC/SBSTA/1997/INF.2), which contains a  list of projects that have been accepted, approved or  endorsed by the designated national authorities.

The EU called for establishment of a credible base line  that would reflect what would have happened in the absence  of an AIJ project. The calculation of the benefits should  be transparent and include only those leading to genuine  greenhouse gas (GHG) reductions. She noted that further  work was required on technology-specific baselines and  third party verification. The US noted that a considerable  amount of progress on practical options can be identified  and highlighted several aspects of criteria for assessing  AIJ, such as monitoring and verifying results,  quantification of project costs and measuring emission  benefits. He underscored the need to examine links between  these issues and credits. He, with CANADA, said the  Secretariat's forthcoming synthesis document should begin  to draw conclusions from AIJ projects. NORWAY highlighted  national experience in AIJ and noted efforts to develop a  portfolio of projects with a view to balancing sectors and  technologies. COSTA RICA said the willingness to pay for  GHG reductions through AIJ is linked to financing and  stressed the need for crediting.

ZIMBABWE, CHINA, KUWAIT and MALAYSIA cautioned against  forming premature conclusions on AIJ based on the pilot  phase. ZIMBABWE and CHINA said it would not be possible to  assess the effectiveness of AIJ by 2000. SAUDI ARABIA said  many activities had been initiated to reaffirm the idea of  AIJ and noted that project approval by the host government  is not a sign of success because some countries lack the  capacity to judge benefits. SAMOA noted that only twelve  Parties, two from Annex I, were currently involved in AIJ  activities. While significant opportunities for AIJ exist  worldwide, few countries in the Asia Pacific region have an  understanding of this issue.

Methodologies Group: An informal group on methodological  issues met in the evening and heard a presentation by the  Secretariat on its Methodological Work Programme. Delegates  gave general views and asked questions, to which the  Secretariat will provide answers at the group's next  meeting. Delegates will also hear presentations from  intergovernmental organizations on their activities.  Delegates will then begin drafting conclusions.

# SUBSIDIARY BODY ON IMPLEMENTATION

Chair Mohamed Ould El Ghaouth (Mauritania) convened SBI-6.  He reminded delegates that the SBI would not meet at COP-3  and must finalize a number of recommendations at SBI-6 and  SBI-7 in October. On the adoption of the agenda  (FCCC/SBI/1997/7), he invited the Philippines to ask  colleagues if they were also prepared for a preliminary  exchange of views on proposals for amendments to the FCCC  and its annexes (FCCC/SBI/1997/11). If not, the proposals  will go directly to COP-3. SAUDI ARABIA, supported by  KUWAIT, sought deletion of Agenda Item 9 on matters arising  from UNGASS. He said there was little of substance from  UNGASS to send to COP-3. The Chair noted that the item was  simply for information.

On administrative and financial matters, said the budget  will have to be adopted at the current session of the SBI.  FCCC Executive Secretary Zammit-Cutajar introduced  documentation on the programme budget for the years 1998- 1999 (FCCC/SBI/1997/10, INF.1, and INF.2). He also drew  attention to an informal document on the status of payments  to the FCCC core budget and said the cash flow situation  continued to warrant concern. He said the level of initial  budget estimates had been revised downwards but would  remain above the 1997 level.

He also discussed a proposal to maintain a post-Kyoto  contingency fund for the management of any unanticipated  process to emerge from COP-3. On the Participation Fund, he  warned that some linkage may be introduced between Parties'  applications for funding and the status of their  contributions.

LUXEMBOURG, for the EU, introduced a formal statement on  the programme budget for 1998-1999, noting continuing  concern at the total amount of the budget proposals  presented by the secretariat, and a proposed 50% increase  overall. The statement addressed: tasks requested by SBSTA  where a deficit appears in the balance between these and  other secretariat activities; conference servicing; any  post-Kyoto intergovernmental process; review of overhead  charges; volume of documentation; budgeting for in-depth  reviews of national communications; remuneration of senior  posts; the budget structure; and Convention Trust Funds.  The EU proposed a contact group to take the work on the  budget forward.

# AD HOC GROUP ON ARTICLE 13

Chair Patrick Szell (UK) opened the last AG13 meeting  before COP3, recalling that at AG13-4 some progress had  been made, mainly due to the decision that AG13 should not  aim to conclude its work before COP-4, pending a decision  by the AGBM on the nature of the compliance regime. He  noted other points of convergence and divergence at  AG13- 4.

The Chair called attention to the draft Multilateral  Consultative Process (MCP) (FCCC/AG13/1997/2, Annex II)  containing proposals on functions and procedures with a  number of bracketed references. He indicated that  additional submissions by Switzerland and Uzbekistan had  been circulated. (FCCC/AG13/1 997/Misc.2) The Agenda was  adopted (FCCC/AG13/1997/2).

Temporary accreditation of NGOs and intergovernmental  organizations was agreed pending a decision by COP-3. On  organization of work of future sessions, the Chair referred  parties to a chart contained in document  FCCC/AG13/1997/3.

The Chair requested that delegations circulate amendments  on the draft MCP immediately to allow for their  consideration overnight. The EU circulated its proposals.  Chair Szell outlined a draft decision he had prepared for  COP-3 requesting provision for two more sessions of the  AG13, each lasting six half-days, with the aim of  completing work by COP-4.  Meeting the target date would  not be guaranteed.

On the scope and elements of an MCP, Chair Szell invited  comments on the ordering of paragraphs in the MCP  compilation text. The EU said the opening paragraph should  refer to a 'process' as mandated by FCCC Article 13.  Reference to the establishment of a committee should follow  later. The US warned against getting ahead of COP-3 and  added that he was not in a position to endorse any course  of action for AG13. The Chair invited comments on the first  paragraph of the MCP compilation. Parties discussed: the  introduction of a reference to FCCC Article 13; whether the  paragraph should refer only to the establishment of a  committee or to a process with a subsequent paragraph on a  committee, or both; the question of whether such a  committee should be 'standing' or 'ad hoc;' and whether a  committee should report directly to the COP or to the SBI.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

Delegates at an informal budget discussion differed Monday  afternoon on the implications of budgetary decisions for  AGBM and COP-3 deliberations. Some supported including  funds for a possible post-Kyoto process within a proposed  contingency budget or even including those funds in the  FCCC's core budget, while others said the budget should not  prejudge whether coming negotiations will establish such a  process. The need for separately listing funds for Annex 1  and non-Annex 1 Parties' implementation was also  questioned, but a number of delegations said the  distinction in Parties' responsibilities should not be  eliminated in the budget. Several delegations also  expressed concerns about the apparent increase in staff and  overall budget amount compared to 1997 figures and  requested further information on these issues from the  Secretariat.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

## SBI and AG13:

Both groups are expected to meet from 10:00  am - 1:00 pm and from 3:00 - 6:00 pm. An SBI informal  meeting on the budget may convene in the evening. Consult  the Daily Programme.

Division of Labor Group: The group is expected to meet from  11:00 am - 1:00 pm and from 4:00 pm  - 6:00 pm in the Haydn  Room.

Methodologies Group: The group is expected to meet from  11:00 am - 1:00 pm and from 3:00 pm - 6:00 pm in the Koch  Room.