---
title: "MEETINGS OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES TO THE UNITED NATIONS FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE, 28 JULY - 5 AUGUST 1997"
id: enb1246e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1246e
date: 1997-08-05
abstract: "The sixth sessions of the Subsidiary Body for  Implementation (SBI-6) and the Subsidiary Body for  Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA-6) and the fifth  session of the Ad Hoc Group on Article 13 (AG13-5) will  begin on Monday, 28 July 1997 at the Hotel Maritim in Bonn,  Germany. The seventh session of the Ad Hoc Group on the  Berlin Mandate (AGBM-7) will begin on Thursday, 31 July."
---

# RECENT MEETINGS

### CSD-5

The fifth session of the UN Commission on  Sustainable Development (CSD-5) convened in New York from  8-25 April 1997 to complete preparations for the UN General  Assembly Special Session (UNGASS). Under the sectoral issue  of atmosphere, discussions centered on the message to  emanate from UNGASS regarding the desired outcome of COP-3  of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate  Change (FCCC). The final text contained a 'menu' of five  bracketed proposals for consideration at UNGASS. Australia  proposed language noting that UNGASS should recommend that  the FCCC accelerate negotiations, produce a satisfactory  result and recognize the global nature of the problem. The  EU, supported by Switzerland, proposed specific emissions  reduction targets (15% reduction below 1990 levels by  2010). AOSIS presented its proposed protocol (20% reduction  below 1990 levels by 2005) as consistent with the Berlin  Mandate. Japan called for agreement on quantified  objectives for emission reductions and agreement to  elaborate on policies and measures. The US, Australia,  Japan, Canada, Colombia, Iran, Russia, Venezuela, Nigeria  and Saudi Arabia objected to including specific negotiating  positions in the text and cautioned against prejudging the  COP-3 outcome. In the final Plenary, the US added a  proposal to the 'menu' that urges: adoption of the  strongest possible agreement, including legally-binding  budgets or targets for developed nations; maximum  flexibility in reaching budgets or targets; and  participation of all countries in taking meaningful actions  to address the problem.

### UNGASS

UNGASS, held in New York from 23-27 June 1997,  produced a Statement of Commitment and a Programme for the  Further Implementation of Agenda 21. A ministerial group on  climate change met on Thursday, 26 June chaired by  ministers from Argentina and Japan. Delegations who made  proposals in the text explained their positions. Brazil and  Switzerland noted that the public would measure the success  of UNGASS by its statement on climate change. Japan  proposed using language from the Denver G-8 Summit, which  stated that at COP-3 the industrialized countries should  commit to meaningful, realistic and equitable targets that  will result in reductions of greenhouse gas emissions by  2010. Furthermore, the agreement must ensure transparency,  accountability and flexibility in meeting these targets.  The EU proposed text calling for an agreement on a legally- binding commitment for the developed world at FCCC COP-3,  including commitments to a significant reduction of the  emissions of greenhouse gases below the 1990 level by the  years 2005 and 2010, as well as to mandatory and  recommended policies and measures, including harmonized  ones. Saudi Arabia proposed deleting the text and stated  that the existing paragraph provided sufficient guidance.  Delegates who proposed text met in a contact group to  produce a combined text.

The combined text noted that at COP-3 the developed  countries should seek legally binding, meaningful,  realistic and equitable targets that will result in  significant reductions of greenhouse gas emissions within  specified time frames such as 2005, 2010 and 2020. Japan  objected to 'significant' and Australia disapproved of  'legally-binding.' The Co-Chairs reported the result back  to the Committee of the Whole (COW) and delegates agreed to  reconvene the ministerial group.

On Friday, 27 June, the Co-Chairs reported to the COW that  the ministerial group had held further discussions, but no  consensus could be reached. Chair Tolba said that without  consensus the paragraph would have to be deleted. Norway,  Brazil, AOSIS, Switzerland, Trinidad and Tobago and the EU  expressed strong regret that UNGASS could not agree on  recommendations and requested an additional session. Saudi  Arabia and Venezuela were skeptical about resolving the  issues in the time remaining. The Republic of Korea, the  Russian Federation and Australia agreed to try again, but  cautioned that the group must be open-ended, noting that  the use of a small group had led to problems before. The US  also noted that difficulties arose because some positions  were 'stepped on' during discussions. An open-ended group,  chaired by Derek Osborn, was convened for a final attempt  to reach consensus. He polled participants in the meeting  for their positions and drafted a new paragraph.

Further consultations resulted in agreed text stating,  inter alia: At the nineteenth special session of the  General Assembly, the international community confirmed its  recognition of the problem of climate change as one of the  biggest challenges facing the world in the next century.  The leaders of many countries underlined the importance of  this in their addresses to the Assembly, and outlined the  actions they have in hand, both in their own countries and  internationally, to respond. The ultimate goal which all  countries share is to achieve stabilization of greenhouse  gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would  prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the  climate system. This requires efficient and cost-effective  policies and measures that will be sufficient to result in  a significant reduction in emissions. At this session,  countries reviewed the state of preparations for COP-3. All  are agreed that it is vital that there should be a  satisfactory result. The position of many countries for  these negotiations is still evolving, and it was agreed  that it would not be appropriate to seek to predetermine  the results, although useful interactions on evolving  positions took place.

There is already widespread but not universal agreement  that it will be necessary to consider legally binding,  meaningful, realistic and equitable targets for Annex I  countries that will result in significant reductions in  greenhouse gas emissions within specified time frames, such  as 2005, 2010 and 2020. In addition to establishing  targets, there is also widespread agreement that it will be  necessary to consider ways and means for achieving them and  to take into account the economic, adverse environmental  and other effects of such response measures on all  countries, particularly developing countries. International  cooperation in the implementation of Chapter 9 of Agenda  21, in particular in the transfer of technology to and  capacity-building in developing countries, is also  essential to promote the effective implementation of the  FCCC. There is also a need to strengthen systematic  observational networks to identify the possible onset and  distribution of climate change and assess potential  impacts, particularly at the regional level.

## TECHNOLOGIES FOR AIJ CONFERENCE

A conference on  technologies for AIJ (Activities Implemented Jointly) was  held in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada from 26-29 May  1997. Forty-one AIJ projects are currently underway and  this conference provided an opportunity to hear about many  others being developed. Discussions ranged from forest  management in Latin America to tea-drying in Sri Lanka;  from energy efficiency improvement in India to solar power  in Crete; from use of carbon dioxide for enhanced oil  recovery in China to improved cooking facilities and  lighting in Africa. The conference brought together 220  delegates from 41 countries representing private industry,  academia and government institutions. Speakers identified  technologies suitable for reducing emissions through  improved energy technology and renewable energy systems, as  well as better use of energy in heating and transport; ways  of enhancing natural sinks and stores for carbon dioxide  were also discussed extensively. Participants also  identified hurdles that must be overcome to fulfill the  potential of AIJ, including maximizing and equitably  sharing benefits from the projects. The proceedings of the  conference will be published by IEA; tel: +44 1242 680753;  fax +44 1242 680758; e-mail: andrea@ieagreen.demon.co.uk.

## EIGHTH GLOBAL WARMING INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE & EXPO

The  Eighth Global Warming International Conference & Expo (GW8)  was held from 26-29 May 1997 in New York. GW8 concluded  with a large number of new findings regarding recent  progress in science and policy and held eighteen concurrent  sessions chaired by a range of international  representatives. Particularly important was the recognition  worldwide of Extreme Events (EE), short for extreme  climatic events, during the earth's current climatic  transition. The economic impacts of EE are a direct result  of the interaction between EE and population centers. The  rate of the growth in the impact as measured by the  economic index EEI (the Extreme Event Index) is observed to  be much greater than the growth in population. For example,  economic losses due to both storm and flood-related EE have  increased sixty-fold in the US between the 1960s and the  1990s, while the population has not even doubled.  Participants noted that this rate of increase can only be  attributed to global circulation unrest due to heat  pollution and greenhouse trapping of reflected solar  radiation.

Participants noted that the organization of the CO2  Utilization Consortium (CUC), an industrial group, has been  formalized and will oversee and fund the development of CO2  utilization technology and implement policy to support such  activities. The Expo showcased new technologies for energy  and the environment, as well as journals, books and  software devoted to energy and environmental management,  air pollution, greenhouse gas mitigation and other topics.  The proceedings of GW7 and GW8 can be ordered from the  World Resource Review (WRR); +1-630-910-1551; fax: +1-630- 910-1561; e-mail: syshen@megsinet.net.

## REGIONAL WORKSHOP ON ACTIVITIES IMPLEMENTED JOINTLY

Participants from 25 countries, as well as NGOs, the IPCC,  the UNFCCC secretariat, UNDP and the World Bank, met in  Cairo from 4-8 July 1997 to discuss the concept of  Activities Implemented Jointly under the FCCC. The workshop  was organized by the Governments of Egypt, Germany, the  Netherlands, Norway and the US Initiative on Joint  Implementation and the International Centre for Environment  and Development (ICED). The objective of the workshop was  to assist in providing an African and Middle East  perspective on the ongoing AIJ pilot phase and beyond.  Specific items addressed were: review of the status of the  AIJ pilot phase; international perspectives on AIJ; case  studies of practical examples in different sectors and  regions where AIJ could play a role in promoting national  development priorities and strategies while providing  greenhouse gas benefits; AIJ project development; AIJ  finance and market development; possible development of AIJ  beyond the pilot phase; and links to COP-3. For more  information contact ICED; tel: +20-2-304-6032; fax: +20-2- 304-6033; e-mail: iced@intouch.com.

## EMISSIONS TRADING FORUM

The Policy Forum on Greenhouse Gas  Emissions Trading was launched in Chicago, US from 19-20  June 1997 under the auspices of UNCTAD and the Earth  Council and hosted by Centre Financial Products, Ltd. The  purpose of the Forum will be to provide timely  institutional support to interested governments,  corporations and NGOs for the development and  implementation of the initial phase of an international  greenhouse gas emissions market. The target date for  launching the emissions market is set for early 2000. The  launching of the Forum at this time was intended to send a  strong message of support to governments participating in  the FCCC negotiations for their use of market-based  instruments to deal with the costly threats posed by  climate change. The Forum is expected to meet again in  October 1997 to agree on steps needed to establish the  emissions trading system. For more information contact  UNCTAD; tel: +41-22-907-5834; fax: +41-22-907-02-74; e- mail: frank.joshua@unctad.org.

## INTERNATIONAL CLIMATE CHANGE CONFERENCE AND TECHNOLOGY  EXHIBITION

This conference, held from 12-13 June 1997 in  Baltimore, US, brought together 300 participants from 9  countries to discuss the growing interest in climate change  mitigation efforts. Sponsored by the International Climate  Change Partnership (ICCP), the US Environmental Protection  Agency and others, the conference featured international  policymakers and industry and environmental NGO  representatives speaking on specific issues related to  climate change debate. The conference sought to introduce  the climate change issue to businesses that are unfamiliar  with it and provide ideas on possible next steps for  companies already integrating it into their long-range  corporate strategies. Exhibits featured environmentally  friendly technologies and programmes and provided  information about emerging technologies for governments and  industry. For information contact the ICCP: tel: +1-703- 807-4052; fax: +1-703-243-2874.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### SBSTA

SBSTA will meet from 10:00 am - 1:00 pm and 3:00 pm  - 6:00 pm.  SBI: SBI will meet from 10:00 am - 1:00 pm. AG13: AG13 will begin at 3:00 pm - 6:00 pm.