---
title: "UNFCCC COP-6 HIGHLIGHTS, MONDAY, 20 NOVEMBER 2000"
id: enb12159e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12159e
date: 2000-11-20
abstract: "Delegates met in a morning Plenary session to consider the reports  of the UNFCCC subsidiary bodies and organizational matters. Her  Majesty Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands then joined participants  to hear speeches by Dutch Prime Minister Wim Kok and French  President Jacques Chirac."
---

In the afternoon, delegates heard statements from observer States,  intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental organizations  and UN bodies. In addition, an informal high-level Plenary meeting  of ministers and senior officials, chaired by COP-6 President Jan  Pronk, met late afternoon to begin negotiations at the ministerial  level by hearing statements on outstanding issues.

# PLENARY

### REPORTS OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES: Subsidiary Body for Scientific  and Technological Advice (SBSTA):

COP-6 President Pronk opened the  Plenary meeting and invited SBSTA Chair Harald Dovland to present  the results of SBSTA's 12th and 13th sessions. Chair Dovland  reported that one agreed draft decision was being forwarded by the  SBSTA to the COP for adoption, in addition to eight SBSTA draft  decisions and four joint draft decisions of the subsidiary bodies  for further consideration by the COP. The decision put forward for  adoption is on Protocol Article 5.1 (national systems). Chair  Dovland also identified key outstanding issues on the other draft  decisions. On activities implemented jointly, he said the key  issue was whether the pilot phase should continue. Regarding  national systems, he highlighted the need to make a decision on  questions of demonstrable progress, and on reporting and review of  assigned amounts. In relation to land use, land-use change and  forestry (LULUCF), he raised questions of how to ensure full  reporting of emissions from deforestation and separate removals  from sinks by direct human-induced activities and natural effects.  With regard to the mechanisms, he noted that agreement had been  reached on a 'prompt start' for the CDM, on the features of its  institutional architecture, and on the need for regional balance.  He said the decisions on policies and measures (P&Ms) and on  single projects also remained to be considered.

### Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI):

John Ashe, Chair of the  SBI, reported on the outcome of the work of the SBI during its  12th and 13th sessions. He took note of a draft resolution from  SB-12 in June 2000 expressing solidarity with certain countries in  Southern Africa, in particular Mozambique, following the  devastation caused by Cyclone Eline, as well as a draft decision  on the dates of the sessions of the subsidiary bodies for the year  2004. He then introduced the conclusions of SB-13, and the draft  decisions transmitted to the COP. On administrative and financial  matters, he said consideration of late contributions had been  postponed until SB-14. He noted the need for further consultations  to forge consensus on the draft decision(s) on implementation of  UNFCCC Article 4.8 and 4.9 and Protocol Article 3.14, and the  draft decision on this issue to be forwarded to COP/MOP-1. He said  the draft decisions on capacity building in developing countries  and in countries with economies in transition also contain  numerous brackets.

### ORGANIZATIONAL MATTERS

On the election of officers other than the  President, COP-6 President Pronk reported briefly that some  regional groups had requested more time to reach agreement on  their nominations. He proposed that the COP-5 Bureau continue in  office in the meantime.

### STATEMENTS BY PARTIES

Delegates then heard two country  statements. Wim Kok, Prime Minister of the Netherlands, drew  attention to the dike built by concerned citizens in front of the  Congress Center where this meeting is taking place, and said he  appreciated its symbolic signficance. He said the Netherlands  would achieve half of its emissions reduction target of 6% through  domestic measures, and half through the mechanisms. On developing  countries and development cooperation, he said the Netherlands  would commit 200 million Dutch Guilders for adaptation measures  and capacity building, which would be additional to previously  agreed contributions. He concluded that a 'worldwide package deal'  was needed at COP-6, and that participants should not leave  without an agreement on the provision of adequate and substantial  assistance to developing country Parties. Other elements of the  outcome should include the identification of new patterns of  production and consumption in industrialised countries, the  creation of an international market for greenhouse gas emissions  permits, and preferential treatment for Least Developed Countries  (LDCs) in the financial mechanisms and the UNFCCC.

Jacques Chirac, President of France, said he had come to The Hague  with a sense of urgency to make progress. He stated that since  1992, Parties had fallen too far behind in taking actions to  combat climate change, and cautioned against further delays.  Suggesting that 'everyone is waiting for someone else to make the  first move' in negotiations, he highlighted that the US produces a  quarter of the world's emissions, and that the per capita US  levels of emissions are three times higher than those of France.  He called on the US to join other industrialized nations in making  a successful transition to an energy-efficient economy. He said  the EU had a duty to set an example by developing more economical  forms of consumption and production in terms of natural resources.  He also stated the intention of the EU member States to ratify the  Protocol in 2002.

On the outcome of COP-6, President Chirac said an effective,  equitable agreement that leaves room for future developments  should be reached. He supported an independent and impartial  compliance mechanism, effective cuts by Annex I countries of their  emissions, and assistance for the most vulnerable countries to  adapt to the consequences of climate change. He said each country  has a duty to build structures that cut its own emissions to a  minimum on a sustainable basis. He emphasized that flexible  mechanisms should not be seen as a means to escape domestic  measures. In this regard, he voiced France's support for GEF  funding to be increased. He called for a prudent approach to  carbon sinks, and said the polluter pays principle should apply  with regard to international air transportation emissions. He said  the ultimate aim should be the convergence of per capita  emissions.

### STATEMENTS BY OBSERVER STATES, IGOS, NGOS AND UN BODIES

In the  afternoon, delegates meeting in Plenary heard statements from 12  UN bodies, specialized agencies and related organizations, four  intergovernmental organizations, 13 non-governmental organizations  and one observer State. Several statements highlighted the need  for decisions to ensure the environmental integrity of the  Protocol and address financing of capacity building, adaptation  and technology transfer. Several non-governmental organizations  also stressed the need to allocate a more suitable time for their  statements, to ensure that government delegates are available to  hear them.

Noting the growing body of scientific evidence on the  anthropogenic effect of climate change, the WORLD METEOROLOGICAL  ORGANIZATION (WMO) urged the COP to support climate research to  resolve uncertainties, address the needs of the most vulnerable  countries and ensure support to the Intergovernmental Panel on  Climate Change (IPCC) to complete its Third Assessment Report. The  IPCC said impacts such as the spread of diseases, rising sea  levels, and bleaching of coral reefs will undermine the goal of  sustainable development.

The WORLD CONSERVATION UNION (IUCN) expressed concern with the  slow pace of negotiations. UNEP urged developed countries to make  a prompt start in reducing their emissions under the principle of  common but differentiated responsibilities. The UN DEPARTMENT OF  ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS stressed the importance of maintaining  the broader principles of sustainable development within climate  negotiations, and warned delegates against making these  discussions too complex and technical for those outside to  understand the process. The ORGANIZATION OF ECONOMIC COOPERATION  AND DEVELOPMENT (OECD) emphasized that effective action against  climate change requires strengthened international cooperation and  concrete national policies. The WORLD COUNCIL OF CHURCHES urged  the negotiators to focus on options that meet environmental  effectiveness, equity and responsibility. MILIEUDEFENSIE stressed  the common moral responsibility to 'save' the UNFCCC and Protocol.

Several speakers highlighted the synergies between the UNFCCC and  other multilateral environmental organizations. The CONVENTION TO  COMBAT DESERTIFICATION SECRETARIAT, RAMSAR CONVENTION SECRETARIAT  and the UNITED NATIONS UNIVERSITY called for implementation of  joint programmes and coordination of activities to avoid  repetition. The CONVENTION ON BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY SECRETARIAT  urged Parties to ensure that LULUCF activities are consistent  with, and supportive of, maintaining biodiversity. UNDP  underscored the importance of addressing climate change in the  broader context of combating global poverty, noting the  opportunities to address climate change and sustainable  development through the energy sector. The WORLD BANK emphasized  the link between environmental protection and poverty alleviation.

Several speakers highlighted the CDM and its contribution to  sustainable development. The US BUSINESS COUNCIL FOR A SUSTAINABLE  ENERGY FUTURE supported domestic and early actions to address  climate change now, a prompt start of the CDM, and translation of  environmental objectives into business opportunities. UNIDO said  bypassing countries with low emissions in the CDM in favor of  larger emitters would be a lost opportunity to address social  equity needs. He stressed capacity building to overcome existing  barriers and take advantage of the CDM and JI. Noting proposals to  exclude nuclear power from the CDM, the INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC  ENERGY AGENCY urged Parties to consider nuclear energy in the  context of climate change, stating that the concerns about safety  and possible proliferation of weapons are not based on climate  concerns. The CLIMATE NETWORK AFRICA emphasized the importance of  a concrete adaptation fund.

On partnerships, the INTERNATIONAL CONFEDERATION OF TRADE UNIONS  urged governments to cooperate with business and labor  organizations in meeting the long-term goal of addressing climate  change, while the INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL FOR LOCAL ENVIRONMENTAL  INITIATIVES (ICLEI) stressed the importance of supporting local  governments.

On the inclusion of sinks to reduce greenhouse gases, IUCN  stressed an ecosystem approach, focusing on multiple benefits and  results. The GLOBAL LEGISLATORS ORGANIZATION FOR A BALANCED  ENVIRONMENT (GLOBE) said there was a need for additional research  on sinks to eliminate prevailing scientific uncertainties, while  the INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC) supported their  inclusion. The INDIGENOUS PEOPLE'S ORGANIZATION opposed attempts  to include sinks in the CDM. The CONFEDERATION OF EUROPEAN FOREST  OWNERS said forest products provide long-term carbon storage and  that carbon stock changes should be calculated according to the  growth in the volume of the forests, and not just changes in land  use.

The INTERNATIONAL GAS UNION highlighted the opportunity offered by  natural gas in reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The  INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTE OF REFRIGERATION urged taking advantage of  the Protocol to boost technology transfer and to train developing  country technicians to address greenhouse gas emissions from the  refrigeration sector.

OPEC noted the adverse impacts of implementing the Protocol on the  economies of developing country members. The GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT  FACILITY (GEF) affirmed its commitment to fully incorporate the  outcomes of the COP into its efforts.

TURKEY, an observer State, called for its removal from the group  of UNFCCC Annex II Parties and requested to be considered an Annex  I Party with special circumstances.

# INFORMAL HIGH-LEVEL PLENARY

President Pronk opened this meeting, stating that its purpose was  to undertake negotiations at the ministerial level. He noted that  countries had been seated in their negotiating groupings or  alliances so as to allow better consultations among members. He  distributed an informal note summarizing his personal perspective  on the progress made last week and the 'crunch issues' still to be  resolved in order to strike a balanced deal on the Buenos Aires  Plan of Action. He said such a 'help-desk' approach would assist  countries in focusing on the 'crunch issues' requiring political  negotiations and decisions. These 'crunch issues' relate to  capacity building, technology transfer, adverse effects, guidance  to the GEF, the mechanisms, LULUCF, P&Ms, compliance, Protocol  Articles 5,7 and 8, and the cross-cutting issues of funding and  funding mechanisms. He then invited Parties to make short  political statements on the basis of which he will make a proposal  so as to help political leaders in their work.

Emphasizing its commitment to make COP-6 a genuine success, the G-77/CHINA expressed its concerns on funding, capacity building,  technology transfer, UNFCCC Article 4.8, 4.9 and Protocol Article  3.14 (adverse effects), and the CDM. He added that these issues  should be discussed first. He highlighted the need for full  participation by all members of the Group so as to ensure  transparency and openness, and opposed any fragmentation. He then  listed the G-77/China coordinators for each of the outstanding  issues.

The EU and the ENVIRONMENTAL INTEGRITY GROUP supported grouping  the 'crunch issues' into clusters, and undertook to identify  spokespersons for the individual issues by Tuesday morning. The EU  underlined its strong belief that an agreement ensuring  environmental integrity and equity would be reached by the end of  the week.

Noting that the Protocol explicitly recognizes the role of forests  as potential sources and sinks of carbon, the US argued that there  is a growing consensus for the full inclusion of agricultural and  grazing land, and broad recognition of the central role of  forests, although less agreement on how to account for forests  within the Protocol. He outlined a proposal on behalf of the US,  JAPAN and CANADA to account for the contribution of forests in  Annex I Parties. According to this proposal, all countries would  be able to count fully not more than 20 million metric tonnes of  annual carbon sequestration in managed forests. Noting concerns  relating to scale, he proposed that currently projected  sequestration beyond this level should be discounted by two- thirds. He argued that this approach, accompanied by full  accounting for sequestration in farm land, preserves the nature of  the Kyoto bargain and is a key element for success at The Hague.

Reacting to the US proposal, AOSIS said his group has a clear  position on this subject, and that he looked forward to sharing it  once the details of the US proposal were further clarified.  BULGARIA, on behalf of the CENTRAL GROUP 11, said the Group would  undertake to identify spokespersons for the individual issues by  Tuesday, and would comment on President Pronk's informal note once  members had studied the document. Noting the importance of  environmental integrity, JAPAN highlighted the need for rules to  operationalize the Protocol and mobilize the private sector. SAUDI  ARABIA said Annex I Parties should present their financial  commitments during the high-level meeting on Tuesday morning.

Concluding the meeting, President Pronk said he would make a  proposal on Tuesday on the organization of the group's work. He  said the proposal would include combining and sequencing the  issues, seeking Friends to help him to conduct discussions, and  assisting ministers and high level officials in organizing  informal meetings.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

The corridors were buzzing Monday evening as delegates pondered  over the outcome of the afternoon's informal high-level meeting,  and speculated on the next steps that President Pronk will be  suggesting Tuesday morning. The US move to add hard numbers to its  proposal on LULUCF was seen by some as a pre-emptive compromise  and a set back to the hard line position of countries that oppose  additional activities. Others, though, characterized the proposal  as a 'fudge,' arguing that the proposed full credit for 20 million  metric tonnes of carbon is more than generous.

The manner in which President Pronk intends to try to organize the  informal high-level meetings is still raising questions among  delegates. Many participants had arrived at the high-level meeting  on Monday expecting to hear President Pronk's proposal on how to  deal effectively with the many remaining key issues. Some were  questioning the extent to which the demand for transparency will  either impede or increase the efficiency of the negotiations.  Given the G-77/China's opposition to an informal proposal to split  negotiations into three issue clusters, participants wonder how  President Pronk will proceed.

Another relevant point of discussion has been the the sequence in  which ministers should take up the 'crunch issues,' with the G-77/China pushing to prioritize financial commitments and other  key issues for developing countries.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### PLENARY - STATEMENTS BY PARTIES

Plenary will convene from 10:00  am in Prins Willem-Alexander Hall to hear policy statements  delivered by Ministers and Heads of Delegation representing an  estimated 115 Parties to the Convention. It is likely to continue  throughout the day and late into the night.

### INFORMAL HIGH-LEVEL PLENARY

The informal high-level Plenary  chaired by COP-6 President Pronk, which first met on Monday  afternoon, will reconvene at 10:30 am in Van Gogh Hall in an open  session. President Pronk is expected to present his proposal for  the organization of work of this meeting, and will attempt to  encourage Ministers and Heads of Delegation to make progress on  the outstanding political issues needing decisions at COP-6.