---
title: "REPORT OF THE MEETINGS OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES TO THE FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE 28 JULY - 7 AUGUST 1997"
id: enb1255e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1255e
date: 1997-08-07
abstract: "The subsidiary bodies to the Framework Convention on  Climate Change (FCCC) met from 28 July - 7 August 1997 at  the Hotel Maritim in Bonn, Germany. A total of 145 Parties  and Observer States participated in the session, as well as  691 representatives from NGOs and the media. The seventh  session of the Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate (AGBM-7)  further streamlined the negotiating text for a protocol or  another legal instrument. The Subsidiary Body for  Implementation (SBI-6) reached agreement on arrangements  for intergovernmental meetings and the programme budget,  but will have to further discuss the financial mechanism  and national communications at its next meeting."
---

Discussions in the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and  Technological Advice (SBSTA-6) centered on methodological  issues, such as methods for inventories and projections of  greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. SBSTA also considered  technology transfer and activities implemented jointly  (AIJ). A joint SBI/SBSTA contact group produced a decision  for adoption at COP-3 on the division of labor between the  two groups. The fifth session of the Ad Hoc Group on  Article 13 (AG13-5) continued its review of proposals for a  multilateral consultative process (MCP).

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FCCC

## COP-1

The first meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the  FCCC (COP-1) took place in Berlin from 28 March - 7 April  1995. Delegates reached agreement on what many believed to  be the central issue before COP-1 - adequacy of  commitments. The result was a mandate to launch a process  toward appropriate action for the period beyond the year  2000, including strengthening of the commitments of  developed countries. Delegates also reached agreement on a  number of other important issues including: the  establishment of a pilot phase for implementation of joint  projects; the location of the Permanent Secretariat in  Bonn, Germany; the budget for the Secretariat; financial  procedures; and the establishment of the subsidiary bodies.  Delegates, however, did not reach consensus on the rules of  procedure. This critical issue, including a decision on the  voting rules and the composition of the Bureau, was  deferred until COP-2.

### AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE (AGBM)

COP-1  established an open-ended Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin  Mandate (AGBM) to begin a process to enable it to take  appropriate action for the period beyond 2000, including  the strengthening of the commitments of Annex I Parties  through the adoption of a protocol or another legal  instrument. At AGBM-1, held in Geneva from 21-25 August  1995, delegates considered several issues, including an  analysis and assessment to identify possible policies and  measures for Annex I Parties and requests for inputs to  subsequent sessions. At AGBM-2, which was held in Geneva  from 30 October - 3 November 1995, delegates heard new  ideas for the structure and form of a possible protocol.

At AGBM-3, held in Geneva from 5-8 March 1996, delegates  heard a number of specific proposals on new commitments for  Annex I Parties, including a two-phase CO2 emissions  reduction target proposed by Germany. They also discussed  how Annex I countries might distribute or share new  commitments, and whether those should take the form of an  amendment or protocol. AGBM-4, held from 8-19 July 1996 in  Geneva, completed its in-depth analyses of the likely  elements of a protocol or other legal instrument, and  appeared ready to move forward on the preparation of a  negotiating text at its next session.

### SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE  (SBSTA)

SBSTA was established by COP-1 to link:  scientific, technical and technological assessments;  information provided by competent international bodies; and  the policy-oriented needs of the COP. At SBSTA-1, held in  Geneva from 28-30 August 1995, delegates confronted  technically and politically complex issues including:  scientific assessments, national communications and AIJ  under the pilot phase. Among the more contentious issues  were definition of SBSTA's relationship with the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the terms  of reference and composition of the technical advisory  panels on technologies and methodologies (TAPs) and the  elaboration of guidelines for national communications from  non-Annex I Parties.

SBSTA-2, held in Geneva from 27 February-4 March 1996,  considered the IPCC's Second Assessment Report (SAR) and  the Technical Advisory Panels (TAPs) and could not yet  agree on how to absorb or respond to scientific predictions  of climate change. Although initial discussions gave the  impression that SBSTA-2 would greet the IPCC's predictions  with less resistance than in previous FCCC negotiations,  oil producers and other developing countries ultimately  blocked consensus on specific conclusions about the SAR.  Weekend negotiations resulted in a fragile agreement on  language defining the divergence of opinion.

At SBSTA-3, held from 9-16 July 1996, delegates discussed  the SAR and sent an unfinished draft decision with brackets  to the COP for resolution. Decisions were adopted in  conjunction with the SBI on Communications from Annex I  Parties and on Communications from non-Annex I Parties.  Progress was made on a roster of experts and technical  panels.

### SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION (SBI)

The SBI was  established by the COP to assist in the review and  assessment of the implementation of the Convention and in  the preparation and implementation of the COP's decisions.  SBI-1 took place from 31 August - 1 September 1995 in  Geneva. The SBI addressed a number of issues and  recommended that the COP adopt the draft Memorandum of  Understanding with the GEF as the financial mechanism,  proposing a draft decision on this item to be adopted by  COP-2.

At SBI-2, held in Geneva from 27 February - 4 March 1996,  delegates considered in-depth reviews of national  communications, and matters related to the financial  mechanism. While delegates welcomed the GEF Council's  adoption of its operational strategy, many noted the need  to expedite the process of providing 'full agreed costs'  for non-Annex I communications or risk serious delay. At  SBI-3, held from 9-16 July 1996 in Geneva, differences were  resolved in closed sessions, and were considered for  adoption by the open SBI session only after consensus had  been reached on: technology transfer; the operating budget  of the Secretariat; the Annex to the Memorandum of  Understanding (MOU) between the GEF Council and the COP;  and national communications from non-Annex I Parties.

### AD HOC GROUP ON ARTICLE 13 (AG13)

AG13 was set up to  consider the establishment of a multilateral consultative  process available to Parties to resolve questions on  implementation. AG13-1, held from 30-31 October 1995 in  Geneva, decided to request Parties, non-Parties, and  intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to  make written submissions in response to a questionnaire on  a multilateral consultative process. At AG13-2, held in  July 1996 in Geneva, participants received a synthesis of  responses to a questionnaire on establishing an MCP under  Article 13 (FCCC/AG13/1996/1) to be considered at the  Group's December session. Delegates adopted a decision  extending the AG13 mandate to COP-3 and establishing a role  in examining ways to apply an MCP to a protocol in  cooperation with the AGBM.

## COP-2

The Second Conference of the Parties (COP-2) met in Geneva  from 8-19 July 1996. More than 1500 participants from  governments, intergovernmental organizations and NGOs  participated. While many of the more contentious issues,  such as treatment of the IPCC Second Assessment Report  (SAR), were left unresolved, COP-2 did produce some  important political statements. The COP concluded by noting  the 'Geneva Declaration,' which endorses the IPCC  conclusions and calls for legally-binding objectives and  significant reductions in greenhouse gas emissions.

The Conference also saw a significant shift in position by  the US, which for the first time supported a legally  binding agreement to fulfill the Berlin Mandate. However,  even as Parties prepared to strengthen commitments, COP-2  highlighted the sharpest differences yet between  delegations. The strong declarations of support for the SAR  were far from unanimous, suggesting the need for  substantial work in future sessions of the COP's subsidiary  bodies before December 1997 when COP-3 meets in Kyoto,  Japan.

### SUBSIDIARY BODY MEETINGS AFTER COP-2

The subsidiary bodies  met in Geneva from 9-18 December 1996. AGBM-5 considered  proposals from 14 Parties or groups of Parties regarding  the strengthening the commitments in Articles 4.2(a) and  (b), advancing the implementation of Article 4.1 and  possible elements of a protocol or another legal  instrument. Delegates adopted conclusions requesting the  Secretariat to produce a 'framework compilation' of  proposals for further consideration. At SBSTA-4,  discussions were complex and often difficult, but delegates  confirmed future cooperation with the IPCC and agreed to  apply the revised IPCC 1996 guidelines for national  greenhouse gas (GHG) inventories. Delegates also agreed to  further work on revisions to the Uniform Reporting Format  and methodological issues pertaining to AIJ. SBI-4  finalized agreement on the Annex to the Memorandum of  Understanding (MOU) between the Conference of the Parties  (COP) and the Council of the Global Environmental Facility  (GEF). AG13-3 further elaborated positions on a possible  MCP and agreed to continue consideration at the next  meeting in February.

Three of the subsidiary bodies met in Bonn, Germany, from  25-28 February 1997. SBSTA-5 considered a number of issues  and reached agreement on the Uniform Reporting Format,  requested a work plan for an in-depth review of second  national communications and requested a number of reports  on technology transfer. AG13-4 made notable progress in  further refining the function and scope of a MCP and agreed  to a 'framework compilation' that reflects areas of  convergence and divergence. SBI-5 discussions were complex  and often lengthy, but delegates agreed on the timetable  and process for review of the programme budget and agreed  on the FCCC input to the UN General Assembly Special  Session (UNGASS). SBI-5 could not agree on the review of  the financial mechanism or the activities of the GEF.

AGBM-6 met from 3-7 March 1997 in Bonn. Delegates focused  deliberations on the Framework Compilation, which  incorporated the textual proposals from Parties as well as  other proposals for elements of a protocol or another legal  instrument. AGBM-6 also convened 'non-groups' to exchange  views and merge different proposals.

Delegates 'streamlined' the compilation text by merging or  eliminating some overlapping provisions within the myriad  of proposals contained in the Framework Compilation and  brought the process one step, albeit a small one, closer to  fulfilling its mandate. Much of the discussion centered on  a proposal from the EU for a 15% cut in a 'basket' of  greenhouse gases by the year 2010 compared to 1990 levels.  Nonetheless, other proposals emerged in the eleventh hour,  signaling that AGBM-6, despite the hopes of many observers,  had yet to foster much progress on several fundamental  points.

# REPORT OF THE MEETINGS OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES

The subsidiary bodies to the Framework Convention on  Climate Change (FCCC) met from 28 July - 7 August 1997 at  the Hotel Maritim in Bonn, Germany. AGBM-7 met from 31 July  - 7 August 1997. SBI-6 and SBSTA-6 met from 28-30 July and  held final sessions on 5 August. AG13-5 met from 28-30 July  1997.

AGBM-7 met in four 'non-groups,' which were closed to  observers, and deliberated at length. The non-groups  considered: the advancement of existing commitments under  Article 4.1; policies and measures; quantified emission  limitation and reduction objectives (QELROs); and  institutions and processes. The non-groups produced four  revised texts in which all paragraphs remain open for final  negotiation and are not agreed.

SBI-6 met in Plenary, as well as in a number of contact  groups, and considered: the financial mechanism; national  communications; arrangements for intergovernmental  meetings; the programme budget and an NGO consultation  mechanism. SBSTA-6 plenary sessions discussed cooperation  with international organizations, technology transfer and  AIJ. A contact group met several times to consider  methodological issues. A joint SBI/SBSTA contact group  considered the division of labor between the two groups.  AG13 further considered proposals on a possible  multilateral consultative process (MCP) during three  sessions.

## AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE PLENARY

Chair Raúl Estrada-Oyuela (Argentina) opened the seventh  session of the AGBM on 31 July and noted that as COP-3  approached, he remained optimistic despite expected  difficulties. He noted that the G-7+1 meeting in Denver and  UNGASS demonstrated new interest in climate change. He  pointed out that despite some criticism of the scope of the  Berlin Mandate, AGBM is not competent to change it. He  noted that under the FCCC, developed countries committed  themselves to take the lead in reducing emissions, and not  until this occurred could developing countries assume  greater responsibilities. He acknowledged progress toward  an agreement, and pointed to the EU commitment and proposal  as a step forward. He noted that two Parties' target  definitions would be crucial.

FCCC Executive Secretary Michael Zammit-Cutajar indicated  that, at Kyoto he expected a clear agreement on the  understanding of Annex I country commitments under the  FCCC. The result from Kyoto should be a 'strong punch'  against ' business as usual.' It should send a signal to  the real economic actors that things would change in a way  that is compatible both with their interests and with  sustainable development. Although optimistic, he recognized  the difficulty in reducing the proposals on the table to  the sort of signal he described. He urged delegations to  enter into a negotiating mode proving that they are able to  go beyond 'playing with text.' TANZANIA, on behalf of the G-77/China, said that the basis  for action and for an agreement must be strict adherence to  the Convention and to the Berlin Mandate. He indicated that  an agreement entailed advancing commitments for Annex I  Parties while avoiding new ones for non-Annex I Parties. He  referred to UNGASS outcomes, highlighting that in addition  to establishing targets, there was widespread agreement  that it will be necessary to take into account the adverse  effects of response measures on all countries, especially  developing ones.

IPCC Chair Bert Bolin remarked on the Second Assessment  Report (SAR), which states that 'the balance of evidence  suggests a discernible human influence on global climate.'  He stated that enhanced GHG concentrations correspond to a  change in global mean temperature of 0.7-2.1º C, but are  limited to 0.2-1.1º C by aerosol concentrations and climate  system inertia. He stated that global warming for the full  range of IPCC emission scenarios and climate sensitivities  was estimated to be in the range 1.0-3.5º C by the year  2100. He noted that recent analysis shows that Annex I  countries were responsible for 64% of the total CO2  emissions in 1996, down from 75% in 1985. Although most of  the increased emissions stem from non-Annex I countries,  they will not reach 50% of the total emissions for another  15-20 years. He noted that stabilization of CO2 in the  long-term requires efforts by all countries.

LUXEMBOURG, on behalf of the EU, recalled its proposal that  'Annex X' Parties, individually or jointly, in accordance  with the Berlin Mandate, should reduce emission levels for  CO2, CH4 and N2O together (weighted total, using Global  Warming Potential with a 100-year time horizon) by 2005 by  at least 7.5% below 1990 levels. He also proposed that HFC,  PFC and SF6 should be added no later than 2000 to the  'basket' of gases for these reduction objectives. He said  that developed countries must face up to their  responsibilities and take the lead. However, all Parties  must realize that in the longer term an increasingly global  effort is needed to tackle the issue.

BRAZIL summarized its proposal  (FCCC/AGBM/1997/MISC.1/Add.3) by calling for a direct and  objective link to be established between the annual rate of  GHG emissions and the increase in global mean surface  temperature. He proposed that reduction targets be  established in terms of temperature change. He called for  the establishment of a mechanism to guarantee that non- Annex I countries address climate change. He called for the  development of quantitative targets for non-Annex I  countries as they reach appropriate levels of well-being.  He proposed that the Clean Development Fund receive  mandatory contributions from Annex I Parties in proportion  to their overall non-compliance. He noted four points of  negotiation: reduction targets of Annex I Parties expressed  in temperature change; time of performance review for Annex  I countries; initial year of consideration for historical  emissions; and value of assessed contribution to the Clean  Development Fund. He requested that the proposal be  formally submitted to COP-3.

ZIMBABWE, on behalf of the African Group, expressed hope  that the AGBM will accelerate the negotiating process and  reach agreement by the end of the next session. She noted  that African countries are often marginalized by the  interim funding mechanism process. She expressed concern  with the lack of progress made in political deliberations  and urged that the policies and measures and quantified  emissions limitation and reduction objectives within  specified time frames contain provisions for socio-economic  impact assessments. She noted that any decision reached  should not increase the socio-economic and environmental  burdens placed on Africa. She stated that an agreement  should include commitment of financial resources and  technologies for African countries.

The RUSSIAN FEDERATION said the outcome should go through  the same ratification process as the Convention and that  CO2 reduction targets must be considered alongside goals  for removal. SLOVENIA signaled its preparation to  eventually join Annex I Parties in complying with legally  binding commitments and supported an EU proposal for GHG  reductions.

The US said the AGBM agreement must: maintain legally  binding targets; provide maximum flexibility; include  credible and realistic levels; include mechanisms for  national compliance; and involve all countries. He said it  was not possible to decide what kind of numerical target  might be undertaken without knowing what constraints would  be imposed on such a target. The US had introduced  proposals on emissions trading, joint implementation, a  budget process and a banking process to increase  flexibility and reduce costs. In this regard he outlined  two new proposals, which he said are critical in  determining the agreement structure. He explained that a  legally binding agreement would require a compliance  mechanism to which flexibility concepts could be added,  although these were currently tinged with some political  heat. He also called for a comprehensive approach including  all GHGs, sources, sectors and sinks. Where countries  failed to use the enabling IPCC methodology to adopt such  an approach they should be penalized. On all-country  participation, he called for an improved definition of  Article 4.1 and the Berlin Mandate. He noted that while  there is a difference between Annex I and non-Annex I  countries, it was unreasonable to expect that nothing could  be done between the Annex I and non-Annex I commitments.  The US proposal includes a recommendation for a long-term  process toward the objective of the Convention including  all countries and seeking evolution. A new negotiation  would certainly follow the AGBM, and within that timeframe  all countries must participate.

UZBEKISTAN said the countries with economies in transition  require investment in new technologies.

SAUDI ARABIA addressed contradictions in Annex I policies,  such as increased fossil fuel production by developed  countries in the event of lower consumption, leading to  lower imports, and subsidies provided to some fossil fuel  sectors while taxing the use of other fossil fuels. He  asked for consideration of compensation in the event of  negative economic impacts on some States.

The Chair introduced the documentation, including the main  negotiating text compiled at AGBM-6  (FCCC/AGBM/1997/3/Add.1) and proposals from Parties  received after AGBM-6 (FCCC/AGBM/1997/MISC.1/Add.2,3,4, and  5). The Chair stated that delegates would meet in closed  sessions and briefings for observers would be held each  morning.

The Chair then invited a number of Parties with new  proposals to make presentations. JAPAN called for: a SBSTA  study on the removal of carbon dioxide via sinks before the  issue is taken up under QELROS; a review process to reflect  the latest science; and for linkage between entry into  force of an agreement and the total aggregate emissions of  ratifying countries.

GEORGIA called for improved financial mechanisms for the  energy sector and encouragement of private sector  participation in AIJ. SAMOA, on behalf of the ALLIANCE OF  SMALL ISLAND STATES (AOSIS), outlined proposals to fully  reflect the precautionary principle in the work of the  AGBM. He said a guiding objective of the AGBM agreement  should be to ensure that global sea level rise resulting  from climate change does not exceed 20 cm above 1990  levels, and that the average global temperature does not  exceed 2ºC above the pre-industrial level.

In Plenary on 4 August, the Chairs of the non-group  reported on their work to date. Delegates also heard  presentations from NGOs, including the International  Council for Local Environmental Initiatives, a  representative from business and industry, and the Climate  Action Network. JAPAN commented on an NGO report suggesting  that Japan had proposed targets that would allow for large  increases of CO2 emissions by Annex I countries by the year  2010. He stressed that Japan had not made such a proposal  and reiterated Japan's position to reduce CO2 emissions to  less than 1 ton per capita by the year 2100. The Chair of  the OECD Expert Group on Annex I Countries indicated that  the group sought to provide analytical support for AGBM.

# REPORTS OF THE NON-GROUPS

##     NON-GROUP ON QELROS

The non-group on QELROs held a number of meetings  throughout the week and, based on a draft by Chair Luiz  Gylvan Meira Filho (Brazil), produced a consolidated text  with alternatives for each of the following sections:  coverage, nature of target and baseline, banking,  borrowing, Parties with economies in transition, regional  economic integration organizations, flexibility (emissions  trading, joint implementation and cooperative efforts by  interested Parties), measurement, reporting and  communication of information, review of implementation and  compliance, possible impacts on developing countries, and  an annex listing gases.

Two safeguard 'notes' were introduced at the beginning of  the draft negotiating text. One indicates that 'all  paragraphs remain open for final negotiation, and existing  brackets within each paragraph do not prejudge the status  of that paragraph.' The other states, inter alia, that in  the view of many delegations, there are some very important  inter-linkages between the different elements of the text  and inclusion of proposals in any section of the text does  not prejudge consideration of those inter-linkages.

Differing views on how alternatives on flat rate targets  and differentiation would be reflected in the document were  settled after extensive consultations through a chapeau in  the section on 'Nature of target and baseline' stating that  'as yet no consensus has been reached on QELROs and Parties  recognize that when consensus on the establishment and  nature of QELROs is reached, further consolidation and  amendment of the text will be required.' Coverage: Bracketed text in this section refers to the  anthropogenic emissions by sources, anthropogenic removals  by sinks and GHGs to which QELROs shall apply. Brackets  also encompass methodologies for establishing anthropogenic  removal by sinks and the criteria for addition of  greenhouse gases to an 'Annex G' under which these gases  would be listed. Other brackets refer to the periodic  revision of the list of GHGs.

Nature of target and baseline: In this section nine  alternatives address distribution of QELROs for Parties  according to a flat rate approach or a differentiated one,  and include an alternative on budget periods. Variations of  flat rate targets and baselines include the establishment  of target dates for the return of anthropogenic emissions  to 1990 levels by a certain year (2000, 2005, 2010), and  reduction of anthropogenic emissions by an average 15% to  20% below 1990 levels by a certain year (2005, 2010, 2020).

The alternative on budget periods entails setting caps for  GHG emissions within specific time periods for countries  listed under 'Annex Q' or 'Annex Q1.' The countries to be  included in these annexes has yet to be determined.  Countries listed under Annex Q shall adopt national  policies and measures necessary to 'limit' and 'reduce  emissions' by sources, while countries under Annex Q1 shall  undertake policies and measures for the 'mitigation of  climate change.' The alternative on budget periods includes provisions on  meeting emission limitation objectives, calculation of  emissions budgets and the procedure for establishing Annex  Q1 Party Commitments.

One of the alternatives addresses the need to establish  'equity' between the Parties. In this regard, it determines  that commitments will be 'governed by the principle that  mitigation action by Parties listed in Annex Q shall result  in those Parties incurring equal percentage changes in per  capita economic welfare.' Another alternative determines that the range within which  each Party's differentiated QELROs would fall, would be  between a 30% reduction by 2010 from its 1990 level of  emissions and a 40% increase by 2010 over its 1990 level of  such emissions.

Other alternatives propose that Parties listed in Annex I  to the Convention shall individually or jointly cooperate  to ensure that their total aggregate annual/net emissions  of GHGs within a specific time period shall be a percentage  lower than their aggregate emissions for a previous time  period.

Over-achievement/Banking and Under-achievement/Borrowing:  These sections refer to how Parties can 'bank' or 'borrow'  shares of emissions according to the emissions budgets they  have been allocated within a specific time period. They  include a proposal on financial contributions as penalties  for not 'maintaining emissions below the respective  effective emissions ceiling.' Regional Economic Integration Organizations: This section  includes provisions to allow States that are members of a  regional economic integration organization to cooperate in  the implementation of their commitments.

Flexibility: This section includes subsections on emissions  trading, joint implementation and cooperative efforts by  Parties.

Emissions Trading: Three alternatives have been included in  this subsection. One establishes that commitments shall be  fulfilled individually and not through coordinated actions,  including emissions trading. Another states that trading in  emissions permits between 'Annex Q' Parties shall take  place only after a satisfactory equitable initial  allocation of QELROs/emissions budgets has been agreed  upon. The third alternative determines that, except as  otherwise provided for, any 'Annex Q' Party may transfer to  or acquire from any other 'Annex Q' or ' Annex Q1' Party  any of its emissions allowed for a budget period for the  purpose of meeting its emissions limitation and reduction  commitments. Under this alternative, certain criteria and  restrictions have been introduced for the way emissions  trading will operate.

Joint Implementation: The first alternative under this  subsection reiterates that commitments shall be fulfilled  individually and not through coordinated actions. The  second alternative allows for  each 'Annex Q' or 'Q1' Party  to fulfill part of their QELROs obligations to limit or  reduce anthropogenic emissions by all sources and enhance  anthropogenic removal by sinks of GHGs through joint  implementation of mitigation measures. Several options have  been included under this alternative on participation.

Cooperative Efforts by Interested Parties: This subsection  includes a provision according to which Annex I countries,  under certain conditions, may transfer to or receive from  any Party listed in Annex I to the Convention any of the  equivalent emissions reductions or sink enhancements  resulting from specific investments for the purpose of  meeting its obligations. It also states that any Party not  listed in Annex I to the Convention may, on a voluntary  basis, carry out projects that limit GHGs or remove GHGs by  sinks and reservoirs, in accordance with their development  priorities and strategies.

Possible impacts on developing countries of new commitments  in the new instrument/socio-economic injuries sustained by  developing countries: This section reiterates that in the  implementation of policies and measures, provisions in the  Convention pertaining to countries that are particularly  vulnerable to climate change (Art.4.8), shall be fully  taken into account. It also proposes the creation of a  concrete compensation mechanism for damages incurred by  developing countries arising from the implementation of  response measures. Several modalities for the compensation  mechanism have been contemplated, including coverage of  social and economic losses and the right to seek redress  for loss of income from export of fossil fuels.

Measurement, reporting and communication of information:  This section relates to the communication of information  related to the implementation of the protocol or legally  binding instrument that Parties shall undertake. It  encompasses provisions on the need for comparability,  consistency and transparency of information as well as  content and timing.

Review of information, implementation and compliance:  Provisions for the revision of information with a view to  assess compliance of obligations are in this section.  Modalities of reviews by expert teams or committees have  been contemplated, as well as frequency of the reviews, and  recommendations to be made based on outcomes of the  reviews.

Review of commitments: Seven alternatives appear under this  section, and focus on the modalities, frequency and  methodology for the review of the commitments. Options for  entities in charge of conducting the reviews are  incorporated (COP or Meeting of the Parties).

## NON-GROUP ON POLICIES AND MEASURES

Mohamed Ould El Ghaouth (Mauritania) chaired the non-group  on policies and measures (P&Ms), which met twice during  AGBM-7. The discussion focused on whether P&Ms should be  legally binding and whether they should be differentiated.  Some delegations favored legally binding P&Ms and referred  to proposals on several annexes setting differentiated  policies and measures. A group of countries submitted a  non-paper on this issue. Other delegations favored a  flexible approach whereby countries should be able to set  their own P&Ms.

In the final Plenary, delegates received the revised draft  text produced by the non-group. The document refers to the  P&Ms that countries listed in an 'Annex Q' shall adopt or  give high priority. Types of policies and measures to be  adopted by Annex Q countries are classified in lists: P&Ms  in List A would be adopted; those in List B would be  accorded high priority; and those in List C would be given  priority. The revised draft negotiating text includes  provisions according to which policies and measures applied  by Annex Q countries shall: address 'all' GHGs, their  emissions by sources and removal by sinks and relevant  sectors; and contribute to stabilization of GHG  concentrations in the atmosphere. It also states that P&Ms  will have no adverse impacts on socio-economic conditions  of developing country Parties, especially those listed in  Article 4.8 of the Convention.

The draft text calls for: Annex Q countries to draw up  national plans for limiting and reducing anthropogenic  emissions by sources, and enhancing removal of GHGs by  sinks and reservoirs. It determines that national plans  shall be binding on the submitting Party. Another provision  states that 'Parties will continue to retain maximum  flexibility deciding how best, based on their national  circumstances, they can reach emission limitation/reduction  objectives.' In the draft, the sectors to be covered by P&Ms include  energy, transport, industry, agriculture, forestry and  waste management. Listings of specific P&Ms to be included  under List A are heavily bracketed. Among them are: the  abolition or phasing out of subsidies on fossil fuels 'as  the most polluting source of energy;' increased taxation on  'oil/energy/CO2/GHGs;' the exemption of aviation fuel from  taxes; and energy-consumption labelling.

Language on establishing performance indicators to measure  the achievement of P&Ms and goals is also heavily  bracketed.

## NON-GROUP ON ARTICLE 4.1 (COMMITMENTS)

The non-group on continuing to advance commitments under  Article 4.1 met three times under the chairmanship of Evans  King (Trinidad and Tobago). When King had to return to his  country, the non-group continued consultations under John  Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda).

Initially delegates agreed to negotiate on the basis of a  paper prepared by the Chair. Regarding chapeau paragraphs  on advancing the implementation of commitments, some non- Annex I countries reportedly sought to include references  to the Berlin Mandate. They also supported referring to  FCCC elements, including a specific reference to the  introduction of no new non-Annex I commitments, but some  Annex I countries objected.

Some delegations were reluctant to include a reference to  the principle of common but differentiated  responsibilities. There were proposals to delete paragraphs  that conditioned advancement of commitments by non-Annex I  Parties on the provision of financial resources and  transfer of technology by developed countries.

A developed country put forward an alternative draft paper  that would commit Parties to advance implementation of  Article 4.1 and to strengthen collaboration.

Several paragraphs were deleted including those that called  on Parties to: recognize the progress that has been made on  Article 4.1; reaffirm their commitments to 4.1; and to  develop further international cooperation on the basis of  mutually beneficial incentive structures. One delegation  called for the preparation of national inventories on an  annual basis. Some non-Annex I countries opposed annual  inventories because of financial and technical limitations.

Many countries proposed the deletion of a paragraph calling  for cooperation to facilitate mitigation and adaptation to  climate change. Non-Annex I countries noted a strong  objection to the paragraph calling for specific definitions  on policies and measures.

Paragraphs noting the role that development and transfer of  technology should play and calling for entities entrusted  with operation of the financial mechanism to make available  financial assistance for the introduction of technology  were deleted.

On Saturday, 2 August, the Chair agreed to produce a new  text for further discussion containing alternatives for  articles lacking consensus. The draft text on advancing  implementation of existing commitments in Article 4.1 has a  chapeau and two alternatives. The chapeau language that the  'text is without prejudice to the provisions of Article  4.1' resulted from a debate over whether the draft should  include full references to FCCC articles. The note that  'all paragraphs remain open for negotiation and are not  agreed' appears on the text, most of which is heavily  bracketed.

The first alternative notes common but differentiated  responsibilities, capabilities, national and regional  development priorities, objectives and circumstances. It  states that Parties shall not introduce any new commitments  for non-Annex I Parties but reaffirm and continue to  advance existing ones.

The second alternative also pledges Parties to advance  Article 4.1 commitments and adds that they shall strengthen  collaboration through bilateral, multilateral and  Convention-based mechanisms. Text on existing commitments  by non-Annex I Parties makes implementation contingent upon  effective implementation of Annex I Parties' commitments  related to financial resources and technology transfer. It  also calls economic development and poverty eradication the  'first and overriding priority' of developing country  Parties.

The financial mechanism, according to bracketed text in the  second alternative, is to provide necessary resources for  implementation of provisions in 10 areas based on sub- articles of the FCCC: emissions inventories; national  programmes; technology; GHG sinks and reservoirs; climate  change impacts; climate change considerations in relevant  policies and actions; research and observation; information  exchange; education, training and public awareness; and  information related to implementation. The alternative  states that a fund or funds for provision of new and  additional financial resources, which are predictable and  adequate for developing countries implementation of  existing commitments, shall be set up under the Protocol.

The section on emissions inventories includes bracketed  references to submissions on 'an annual basis' and 'annual'  inventory data. The section on relevant policies and  actions includes two alternatives on indicators: one  calling for use of 'national level' indicators and the  other suggesting use of relevant indicators to the extent  possible. The section on information related to  implementation contains three alternatives. One calls for  communication of information by the second COP of the  protocol. The second calls for in-depth reviews. The third  describes in depth reviews of 'Annex I' or 'Annex Q'  parties communications and consideration of 'non-Annex I'  or 'non-Annex Q' communications.

## NON-GROUP ON INSTITUTIONS AND MECHANISMS

The non-group on institutions and mechanisms, chaired by  Takao Shibata (Japan), met four times during AGBM-7. The  non-group considered proposals from the AGBM Chair's  compilation text on the Preamble, Institutions and  Mechanisms and Final Elements. Parties were invited to send  their comments to the Secretariat on a number of the Final  Elements that were not discussed.

In the final draft text, two proposals remain. The first  proposal, in brackets, notes that Parties have concluded  that paragraphs 2(a) and (b) of Article 4 are not adequate,  and that they adopted the Berlin Mandate to strengthen  Annex I commitments. It recognizes that the process will  not introduce any new commitments for non-Annex I Parties  but reaffirms Article 4.1 commitments, taking into account  Articles 4.3, 4.5, and 4.7.

A second and more extensive proposal includes bracketed  introductory paragraphs. One refers to the COP-1 decision  on the Berlin Mandate. The other paragraph includes twice- bracketed references to 'Article 7 paragraph 2' and 'the  Provisions' of the Convention, taking into account that the  Protocol is a related legal instrument to the Convention.

Brackets also appear around the potential contribution of  the elimination of subsidies to the reduction of GHGs in  Annex I countries. The bracketed text notes that 'therefore  highest priority should be given to those policies in  implementing their commitments.' The second proposal also  includes references to: likely impacts on developing  countries and fossil fuel producers; future re-examination  of global efforts to combat climate change by FCCC Parties;  indicators for limiting GHGs; a comprehensive approach;  voluntary measures by all Parties to set QELROS; joint  implementation; flexibility; a future concentration-based  approach to emission limitation goals; and effective  enforcement.

On institutions and mechanisms, there were lengthy  exchanges on the core issue of the relationship between the  COP/FCCC and any new instrument. While there was general  support for 'institutional economy,' whereby the FCCC COP  would serve as the meeting of the Parties to the Protocol,  opposing views were put forward on what authority the COP  would have in regard to the Protocol. Some developing  country Parties were uneasy with the prospect of the  Protocol developing a life of its own and eventually  subsuming the FCCC. They argued for the right of all  Parties to the FCCC to amend the Protocol. Some developed  country Parties were concerned about the future influence  of non-ratifying Parties over the Protocol. One delegate  argued for a distinction between the legal and political  relationship between the COP and the Protocol. There was  general agreement on the possibility of a multilateral  consultative process but decisions about its relation to  the protocol were left open.

The draft text includes two proposals on the Conference of  the Parties. The first proposal asserts that the COP of the  Convention shall serve as the COP to the Protocol, on  condition that decisions on the Protocol should be taken  only by FCCC Parties also party to the Protocol, and that  any member of the FCCC COP Bureau who is not a Party to the  Protocol shall be substituted by a member elected by and  from Protocol Parties. A paragraph on voting also brackets  the type of majority vote and which Protocol Parties can  vote.

The second proposal establishes a Meeting of the Parties to  the Protocol (MOP). In it the FCCC Secretariat shall serve  as the Protocol secretariat, and the FCCC subsidiary bodies  shall also serve as the Protocol's subsidiary bodies. The  section stating that the financial mechanism defined in the  FCCC shall serve as the mechanism for the Protocol contains  brackets around text stating that the mechanism shall be  guided by the Protocol's COP when dealing with Protocol  activities.

There are four proposals on review of information and  review of implementation and compliance. Two of the  proposals refer to the involvement of expert teams in the  review of information. The third states that the MOP shall  receive, review and ensure publication of information. A  fourth, in brackets, states that the COP and its  appropriate subsidiary bodies shall receive national  communications and ensure their in-depth review. Bracketed  references to the multilateral consultative process include  the timing of the establishment or consideration of a MCP,  the MCP referred to in FCCC Article 13, and a reference to  promoting effective implementation.

There are three proposals in the Dispute Settlement  section. The first applies FCCC Article 14 to the Protocol.  A second proposal restricts initiation of disputes to  Parties other than regional economic integration  organizations. There are bracketed references to disputes  concerning implementation of commitments and any claim made  concerning economic injuries sustained by developing  countries, and to the Article on a compensation mechanism.  A reference to the submission of the dispute to the  International Court of Justice is also bracketed. The third  proposal on mandatory, binding dispute settlement has  brackets around a reference to 'specific consequences  flowing from a violation.' On final elements, a number of participants expressed the  view that certain proposals had been placed 'on ice' until  encompassing issues at the AGBM had been cleared. In the  discussion on annexes, a number of developing and newly  industrialized country Parties sought to ensure that an  amendment procedure as rigorous as that of the FCCC would  govern the status of Parties included in the Protocol's  annexes. On the relationship of the Protocol to other  agreements, some Parties opposed a proposal on derogation,  fearing that it would subordinate the Protocol to other  institutions, particularly the World Trade Organization  (WTO). Others sought to establish that the Protocol would  not prejudice the rights and obligations of WTO members. On  entry into force, two main positions emerged. Some  supported ratification based on the number of signatories.  Others supported a 'weighted entry into force' approach,  linking ratification to the percentage contributions to GHG  emissions of ratifying Parties. There was some debate on  whether the percentage should refer to GHGs emitted by  Annex I Parties or to the global figure. Some Parties  argued for a proposal to ensure that any Party withdrawing  from the Protocol would continue to be liable for any claim  accruing against it as a result of economic injury  sustained by developing countries.

Three proposals on the Protocol's Relationship to the  Convention remain in brackets. The first states that: the  FCCC COP must also review implementation of the Protocol;  Parties to the Protocol may seek guidance on matters of  duplication from the COP; and FCCC provisions relating to  protocols are to apply to the Protocol except where  otherwise stated. The second proposal states that Protocol  commitments do not cancel Annex I commitments for the  period before 2000. The third proposal states that the  instrument is a supplement to and integral part of the  FCCC.

In the section on the Adoption and amendment of annexes,  there are bracketed references to: a restriction on the  form (i.e., to lists) of annexes other than those adopted  with the instrument; voting majorities options for annexes;  and entry into force of amendments.

The entire section 'Relationship to other agreements,'  which states that the instrument shall not derogate from  the rights and obligations of Parties under existing  international agreements, in particular, the agreement  establishing the WTO, is bracketed. A section on  Provisional application of the Protocol prior to its entry  into force also remains in brackets.

There are three proposals on entry into force. The  bracketed second proposal places entry into force after the  deposit of the 'fiftieth' ratification, or the deposit by  which the total aggregate emissions for 1990 of 'carbon  dioxide' and/or 'GHGs' of the depositing Parties exceed  'three-fourths' of the total aggregate emissions of  'Parties listed in Annex 1 to the Convention' or 'all  Parties of the Convention' for 1990, whichever is later.  The bracketed third proposal states that the instrument  shall enter into force on the 90th day after ratification  by all Annex I Parties and on the 90th day after  implementation of all Annex I FCCC commitments.

## FINAL PLENARY

The Chair of the institutions and mechanisms non-group  introduced a new draft revised negotiating text and noted  that many brackets remain, but that delegates had succeeded  in streamlining and consolidating the text. He noted that  he will be available to receive comments on the text. The  Chair of the QELROs non-group introduced a draft revised  negotiating text and stated that he was pleased with the  constructive exchange of views between Parties. He noted  that the non-group had made progress in identifying  alternatives, but that the entire text remains in brackets  and will be considered at the next meeting in October. He  stated that the non-group did not have time to consider the  voluntary application of commitments by non-Annex I  Parties. He noted that a proposal calling for a section on  stabilization levels was submitted to the Chair of the AGBM  for consideration. On review of commitments, the Chair of  the non-group stated that because of uncertainty on how the  process will evolve, it was appropriate to keep the Chair's  negotiating text.

He requested the Chair of the AGBM to consider how the  review of commitments will be dealt with in the future. On  measurement, reporting and review of information and  compliance, the Chair suggested that the review be  forwarded to the non-group on institutions and mechanism  for possible discussion. SAUDI ARABIA called on the Chair  to ensure that the draft includes a chapeau stating, inter  alia, that all paragraphs remain open for final negotiation  and that existing brackets do not prejudge the status of a  paragraph.

The AGBM Chair introduced the draft revised negotiating  text on policies and measures. He noted that there had been  considerable discussion on the option of no reference to  policies and measures versus the option of a detailed list  of common coordinated policies and measures. The Chair for  the non-group on Article 4.1 introduced a draft revised  negotiating text and noted that although nothing has been  agreed upon within the text, it offers a good starting  point for negotiations in October.

The G-77/CHINA reminded delegates that the Berlin Mandate  process should not introduce new commitments for non-Annex  I Parties, but advance the implementation of existing  commitments of all Parties. He stated that proposals for  new commitments have been used to obscure the lack of  political will of Annex I Parties. He noted that no  countries have proposed sharing the burden of the effects  of climate change despite the historical emissions of many  Annex I Parties. He stated that the biggest handicap for  non-Annex I countries is that they have no other forum for  discussions other than the negotiating sessions.

The US stated that it is committed to reach an agreement  that will take serious steps to limit GHG emissions. He  noted that paragraphs on the evolution of emission  limitation commitments were not discussed, and called for  their consideration at the next meeting. ZIMBABWE, on  behalf of the African Group, noted that African nations  will leave the meeting concerned about the pace of progress  while the negative effects of climate change continue. She  noted four principles that need to be clearly defined:  limitations of all GHGs; setting realistic per capita  emissions rights that consider population growth and  differentiation; reducing the emissions of Annex I Parties  while controlling growth of emissions of non-Annex I  Parties; and appropriate time frames that consider the  current impacts of climate change. The Chair called on  Annex I Parties to spare no effort in consulting among  themselves to find a compromise during the intersessional  period. KENYA called for a strong protocol or another legal  instrument. SAUDI ARABIA proposed that Annex I Parties  identify the specific policies and measures that they  intend to adopt to achieve their QELROs, and provide an  analysis of the environmental, social and economic effects  of the proposals on non-Annex I Parties. GHANA noted that  many African countries are implementing sustainable  development action plans but that the efforts are being  undermined by climate change. He recognized the importance  of non-Annex I Party commitments and stated that the use of  differentiation for QELROs is both fair and reasonable.  LUXEMBOURG, on behalf of the EU, noted the flexibility and  contribution that the EU has shown in its position and  noted the concerns expressed by the G-77/CHINA.

The Chair noted that all the proposals in the negotiating  text (FCCC/AGBM/1997/3/Add.1 and MISC. 1/Add. 2, 3, 4, and  5) remained on the table and that not all elements of the  negotiating text had been taken up at AGBM-7. The draft  texts presented by the Chairs as outcomes from their non- groups at AGBM-7 would be annexed to the report of the  Session in the same way that SBI had annexed documents on  non-Annex I communications and the review of the GEF.  Encouraged by Parties' remarks, the Chair added that he  would continue with consultations during the intersessional  period and prepare a Chair's text for AGBM-8, which would  serve as the focus of the work.

The Chair noted that the AGBM would end with the final  session in October. After that all that would remain will  be to present a report to COP-3. He recalled his opening  statement to the Plenary in which he had emphasized the  need for proposals for quantitative targets for QELROS and  re-stated that such targets remained the goal. He noted  that with those numbers most other points would fall into  place and stated that nobody should underestimate the  obstacles to be overcome during AGBM-8. He urged Parties to  come to AGBM-8 determined to advance consensus.

On the report of the meeting, the Chair said the  annotations to the Agenda would state that the texts  produced by non-groups would be issued as addenda to the  report. The report itself would be largely procedural. He  invited Parties to authorize the Rapporteur to complete the  report after the session in cooperation with the Chair and  the Secretariat. Responding to questions by SAUDI ARABIA,  the Chair said the Saudi invitation to Annex I countries to  provide information on impacts would form part of the  conclusions in the report. The Chair noted that the Berlin  Mandate may actually extend until COP-3, and that he would  prepare his Chair's text as soon as he could. The Session  was adjourned.

# SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION

On 28 July, Chair Mohamed Ould El Ghaouth (Mauritania)  convened SBI-6. He reminded delegates that the SBI would  not meet at COP-3 and must finalize a number of  recommendations at this session and at SBI-7 in October. On  the adoption of the agenda (FCCC/SBI/1997/7), he invited  the Philippines to ask colleagues if they were prepared for  a preliminary exchange of views on proposals for amendments  to the FCCC and its annexes (FCCC/SBI/1997/11). If not, the  proposals would go directly to COP-3. SAUDI ARABIA,  supported by KUWAIT, sought deletion of an agenda item on  matters arising from UNGASS. He said there was little of  substance from UNGASS to send to COP-3. The Chair said the  item was simply for information.

Divisions of Labor between SBI and SBSTA: On 28 July,  delegates considered document (FCCC/SB/1997/2) and agreed  that a joint SBI/SBSTA contact group, chaired by Amb. Mark  Hambley (US) and José Romero (Switzerland) would consider  the issue. The group met throughout the week and on 4  August, an informal SBI meeting approved the contact  group's draft decision. On 5 August, SBI and SBSTA both  decided to recommend the draft decision for adoption by  COP-3.

The draft decision outlines a general approach, under which  one of the bodies will take the overall responsibility in  considering an issue and will request specific inputs from  the other body if necessary. Where overall responsibility  is not assigned, agendas should be organized to avoid SBSTA  and SBI dealing with such issues in parallel. Where this is  not possible consideration should be given to holding ad  hoc joint sessions.

SBI will have responsibility for developing guidelines on  the processes for consideration of national communications  and other relevant documentation. SBSTA, in cooperation  with SBI, shall have responsibility for developing  guidelines for the provision of comparable information  including all related methodological issues, and shall  consider national communications, such as technical papers,  with the aim of, inter alia, verifying methodologies used.

SBI will, with input from SBSTA, have responsibility for  assisting the COP in the assessment and review of the  effective implementation of the Convention with respect to  the development and transfer of technology. As stipulated  by the Convention, the SBSTA shall have responsibility for  providing advice on all scientific, technological and  methodological aspects.

SBI will have overall responsibility for all policy  questions and relevant inputs related to issues dealing  with NGO consultations, as appropriate. Should SBSTA or any  other subsidiary body conclude that NGOs could provide  relevant input on an item under consideration, that body  could seek and consider such inputs. Issues involving  provisional accreditation related to individual NGOs will  be the responsibility of the relevant body.

On AIJ, SBSTA will have the responsibility for developing  the framework for reporting, including consideration of  scientific, technical and methodological aspects of the  reports. SBSTA will also prepare reports on activities for  the COP. SBI will have the responsibility for assisting the  COP with the review of the progress of AIJ under the pilot  phase, on the basis of inputs from SBSTA.

SBSTA will have overall responsibility for issues related  to research and systematic observation and shall play a  coordinating role in such activities related to  implementation. SBSTA will also have overall responsibility  for providing advice on education, training, public  awareness programmes and public access to information.

Annex I Communications: On 30 July, the Secretariat  introduced documents including: a tentative schedule of the  in-depth review of the second national communications of  Annex I Parties (FCCC/SB/1997/5) in advance of preparations  of a final schedule at SBI-7; an update on trends in past  GHG emissions and future projections (FCCC/SB/1997/6); and  a status report on a review of the first national  communications (FCCC/SB/1997/INF.3) due for completion by  SBI-7. The Secretariat noted the slow pace of submission of  second national communications that were due in April this  year. The EU called on Parties to contribute to a  successful conclusion of the communications process. CHINA  asked the Secretariat to include statements on the  difficulties Annex I Parties have experienced in meeting  their commitments.

In the report of the meeting, delegates took note of the  Secretariat's progress report and requested a report on  experiences with the review process of the first national  communications for consideration at SBI-7.

Draft conclusions on Annex I communications  (FCCC/SBI/1997/CRP.5) were also adopted. They state, inter  alia, that the Secretariat should submit a report at SBI-7  on the progress of Annex I Parties 'individually or  jointly' in returning to their 1990 levels of GHG  emissions. The US noted that their acceptance of  'individually or jointly' did not prejudice its position on  other texts under negotiation. The PHILIPPINES called for  the inclusion of a specific reference to Article 4.2 (b).  SBI also expressed concern at the late submission of  communications by many Annex I Parties and took note of the  report on the informal workshop on Annex I communications.  Annex II Parties were requested to provide information in  accordance with Article 12.3, which calls for information  on financial resources, adaptation assistance and  technology transfer.

Non-Annex I Communications: On 29 July, the Secretariat  presented documents on Secretariat activities regarding  financial and technical support (FCCC/SBI/1997/9) and on  submission of initial national communications  (FCCC/SBI/1997/13). She noted that Argentina and Jordan  have submitted national communications and 40 other non- Annex I Parties had indicated they would do so by 2000.  Luxembourg, on behalf of the EU, said the review process  for non-Annex I communications should begin as soon as  possible. CANADA urged acceleration of non-Annex I  communications. She supported a process for consideration  of non-Annex I communications as a way of advancing  commitments under Article 4.1, including guidelines and  country visits. AUSTRALIA emphasized the review component  as an integral part of the process, noting that country  visits with participation by non-Annex I experts were  helpful in the Annex I Parties process.

ARGENTINA said consideration of non-Annex I communications  should be facilitative, not confrontational, and that he  had no problem with in-depth studies of non-Annex I  communications. TANZANIA, on behalf of the G-77/CHINA,  supported by AUSTRALIA and CUBA, said the discussion of  Annex I and non-Annex I communications should be based on  differentiation. CHINA and MALAYSIA recommended an overall  assessment rather than individual review, noting that  initial non-Annex I Parties' communications may not be as  consistent or complete as Annex I Parties'. The US said  consideration of non-Annex I Parties' commitments need not  be as detailed nor as extensive as that for Annex I  Parties. She said compilation and synthesis of non-Annex I  communications did not require the same schedule or  frequency but could contribute to a comprehensive synthesis  report, which could identify gaps or inconsistencies in  non-Annex I communications.

The PHILIPPINES said a GHG abatement strategy is beyond  developing country commitments and should not be mentioned  except as a possible voluntary activity. With CHINA, INDIA,  MALAYSIA and COLOMBIA, she emphasized that non-Annex I  communications are governed only by FCCC provisions and the  relevant COP-2 decisions. ZIMBABWE, CUBA and others said  provision of initial communications is linked to provision  of funds. SAUDI ARABIA said the financial support must be  sustainable and linked to capacity building.

The REPUBLIC OF KOREA and MALAYSIA underscored varying  country conditions and capacities. BANGLADESH and BURKINA  FASO supported regional workshops. JAPAN said it is  strengthening training courses for developing country  experts to increase capacity. SENEGAL promised to submit  its communication by the Kyoto meeting. The Chair suggested  forming a contact group on this issue to be led by the US  and Malaysia.

The contact group met a number of times but did not reach  consensus. In final Plenary, CHINA reported on discussions  in the contact group, highlighting financial and technical  difficulties and the problems posed for consideration of  communications given the staggered submission schedule.  Delegates agreed that deliberations will continue at SBI-7  and adopted the contact group's draft conclusions. Two  annexes to the conclusions contain draft proposals from the  G-77/CHINA and the US. Under the G-77/CHINA proposal, the  COP would decide to: consider the overall aggregate effects  of measures taken pursuant to FCCC; compile a list of  projects submitted by non-Annex I Parties for financing and  seek funding from the financial mechanism; and consider the  non-Annex I communications in a facilitative, non- confrontational, open and transparent manner. SBI would  conduct initial consideration of the communications and  submit a synthesis report to the COP on the overall  aggregate effects of measures taken pursuant to the FCCC.  The Secretariat was requested to prepare a report on the  guidelines for the preparation of initial communications  with a view to enhancing compatibility.

Under the US draft decision, the COP would decide that  consideration of initial non-Annex I communications will  include, inter alia, the tasks of assessing quantitative  and qualitative information for consistency with applicable  guidelines and preparing a report on the application of  guidelines. The draft decision also requests that the  Secretariat: select experts from names nominated by Parties  to assist in the consideration process; compile and  synthesize information contained in individual national  communications; compile a compendium of projects and  related information submitted by non-Annex I Parties;  arrange regional expert workshops; and note instances where  in-country expert visits would be beneficial and make  appropriate arrangements.

Financial Mechanism: On 29 July, the Secretariat summarized  the compilation of the views submitted by Parties  (FCCC/SBI/1997/MISC.3) and the synthesis report  (FCCC/SBI/1997/8). The Chair requested comments on the  financial mechanism, and noted that in the first GEF  replenishment period no climate change related activities  were denied funding. SAUDI ARABIA noted that the GEF was  sufficient for the interim period, but was outdated. Along  with KOREA, IRAN and the G-77/CHINA, he called for  additional time to consider the financial mechanism.

KUWAIT, NIGERIA and SAUDI ARABIA suggested that Parties  consider other options for a financial mechanism. CHINA  called for an increase in the replenishment funds, and  requested that additional funds be allocated for technology  transfer. MALAYSIA noted that two of its project proposals  have been turned down by the GEF.

The EU stated that the report presented by the Secretariat  provided sufficient basis to support replenishment, and  suggested that the GEF be appointed the permanent operating  entity of the financial mechanism. AUSTRALIA, the US,  CANADA, JAPAN and the UK noted the success of the GEF and  supported making the GEF the permanent mechanism at COP-3.  The UK stated that it is committed to the GEF and prepared  to make substantial contributions. The GEF welcomed the  review of the financial mechanism and noted that it has  provided US$4 billion in operational support for climate  change projects. The G-77/CHINA called for all sources of  information to be carefully examined, and noted that he was  willing to submit a draft decision on the review process. A  contact group chaired by John Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda)  was established to consider the issue.

The contact group met throughout the week and on 31 July  produced a text that contained bracketed references noting  the work done by GEF since its inception and the initial  concerns raised by some non-Annex I Parties. In a section  welcoming the outcome of UNGASS, the text contains  bracketed references recognizing that implementation of  commitments made under international environmental treaties  can be promoted by secure, sustained and predictable  financial support, sufficient institutional capacity, human  resources and adequate access to technology.

Under a bracketed option, the GEF would be appointed the  financial mechanism of the Convention and SBI would  initiate arrangements for Parties to further consider the  GEF's activities, including a method for Parties to raise  performance issues. Under a bracketed alternative, the GEF  would continue as the financial mechanism on an interim  basis pending a review by COP-4.

The text was adopted in the report of the meeting. SBI also  decided to defer consideration of this issue until its next  session and urged all Parties to submit their views on the  financial mechanism no later than 8 September. A number of  delegates noted concern with the date of 8 September and  stated that they had agreed to submit the reports by 25  September to give more time for consideration of the issue.  A compromise date of 15 September was agreed upon.

Administrative and Financial Matters: On 28 July, the FCCC  Executive Secretary introduced documentation on the  programme budget for the years 1998-1999 (FCCC/SBI/1997/10,  INF.1, and INF.2). He drew attention to an informal  document on the status of payments to the FCCC core budget  and said the cash flow situation continued to warrant  concern. He said the level of initial budget estimates had  been revised downwards but would remain above the 1997  level.

He also discussed a proposal to maintain a post-Kyoto  contingency fund for the management of any unanticipated  process to emerge from COP-3. On the Participation Fund, he  warned that some linkage might be introduced between  Parties' applications for funding and the status of their  contributions.

The EU introduced a formal statement on the programme  budget for 1998-1999, noting continuing concern at the  total amount of the budget proposals presented by the  Secretariat and a proposed 50% increase overall. The EU  proposed a contact group to take the work on the budget  forward.

Delegates at an informal budget discussion that afternoon  differed on the implications of budgetary decisions for  AGBM and COP-3 deliberations. Some supported including  funds for a possible post-Kyoto process within a proposed  contingency budget or even including those funds in the  FCCC's core budget, while others said the budget should not  prejudge whether coming negotiations will establish such a  process. The need for separately listing funds for Annex I  and non-Annex II Parties' implementation was also  questioned, but a number of delegations said the  distinction in Parties' responsibilities should not be  eliminated in the budget. Several delegations also  expressed concerns about the apparent increase in staff and  overall budget amount compared to 1997 figures. They  requested further information on these issues from the  Secretariat.

In the final Plenary, the Chair presented the draft  conclusions on the programme budget for 1998-1999 and noted  that they will be included in a formal annex. The delegates  adopted the annex. The EU noted that a 15% increase over  two years in the budget shows the importance that the EU  attaches to the implementation and further development of  the Convention. The Executive Secretary expressed his  appreciation for early closure on this issue and noted that  five of the 10 largest contributions for the year have  still not been received.

Arrangements for Intergovernmental Meetings: On 29 July,  delegates considered document FCCC/SBI/1997/11. On  arrangements for COP-3, the G-77/CHINA, supported by  NIGERIA, VENEZUELA, SAUDI ARABIA, KUWAIT, CHINA, MALI,  IRAN, KOREA, CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC, COLOMBIA and INDIA  said the proposed ministerial segment must include all  heads of delegations and their advisors, not just  ministers. Some delegations said it should be renamed a  'high level' segment and any text for discussion must be  distributed well in advance of the ministerial roundtable.  On COP-3 agenda, the G-77/CHINA supported holding COP-4 in  1998. The EU and AUSTRALIA preferred scheduling COP-4 in  early 1999. Delegates expressed varying opinions as to the  value of a ministerial segment. NIGERIA, CHINA and SAUDI  ARABIA cautioned against including selected partner  organizations and NGOs in the ministerial roundtable and  questioned who would make the selections. JAPAN said NGOs  should be excluded from the ministerial segment given its  highly political nature.

On 30 July, the SBI Chair reported that there was no  agreement on a draft decision on preparations for COP-3 and  COP-4 prepared by the G-77/CHINA, which will include the  second review of Annex I Party commitments. The FCCC calls  for the second review no later than 31 December 1998. The  Chair appealed for flexibility from the G-77/CHINA, which  had experienced difficulties with a proposal for a date for  COP-4. The Chairs of the G-77/CHINA and the EU agreed to  consult with the SBI Chair on arrangements for COP-3 and  COP-4.

In an informal meeting on 1 August, delegates continued to  debate draft conclusions on arrangements for COP-3,  particularly with regard to a proposal that the Secretariat  make all necessary preparations for COP-3 to conduct the  second review of the adequacy of Article 4.2 (a) and (b)  and the review of Annexes I and II. Debate also centered on  text describing the dates of the high-level segment and  noting that the COP President will promote informal  dialogue among Ministers and Heads of delegations.

In final Plenary, delegates accepted draft conclusions  that, inter alia, request the Secretariat to make all  necessary preparations for COP-3 to consider the second  review of the adequacy of Article 4.2 (a) and (b) and that  COP-3 place on the agenda for COP-4 the second review of  those articles. A request for the Secretariat to make  preparations for the review of Annexes I and II was  replaced with a recommendation that COP-3 undertake a  review of available information with a view to taking  decisions regarding amendments to Annexes I and II.

The conclusions also recommend that a High Level Segment of  Ministers and other Heads of Delegations at COP-3 take  place from 8-10 December. Following a G-77/CHINA request, a  paragraph regarding an informal dialogue among Ministers  and other Heads of Delegations was deleted.

Regarding arrangements for COP-4, the SBI recommended that  COP-4 be held in November 1998. The venue will be Bonn  unless a proposal by Party to host the COP is received.

NGO Consultation Mechanisms: On 29 July, SBI considered  mechanisms for consultation with NGOs. The Secretariat  introduced two documents (FCCC/SBI/1997/14 and Add.1).  Regarding access by NGOs, one document contains proposals  on the improvement of existing mechanisms and the  establishment of new ones, including a Business  Consultative Mechanism (BCM). The other document (Add.1),  contains additional reflections by the Secretariat. A  representative of public utilities commissions and the  Climate Action Network agreed with increased transparency  in the accreditation and registration process. A speaker  representing business and industry NGOs supported the  concept of a BCM, and stressed the need to improve current  communications mechanisms. The International Council for  Local Environmental Initiatives (ICLEI) noted that a report  will be submitted to the COP and its subsidiary bodies  providing data on local government initiatives to reduce  GHGs. The US, MALAYSIA, EGYPT, SENEGAL, the EU, CANADA,  INDONESIA, AUSTRALIA, BENIN and VENEZUELA welcomed  participation of the NGOs in the Convention. MALAYSIA and  BENIN stated that NGOs who are not supportive of the  Convention process should not be allowed to attend.

INDONESIA called for the mechanism for consultation to be  broadened to include local government and business NGOs.  CANADA, AUSTRALIA and VENEZUELA noted the financial  constraints of the Secretariat. CANADA suggested improving  existing bodies and mechanisms. The Chair called on Parties  to submit comments and noted that the issue will be taken  up again at SBI-7.

In final Plenary, SBI took note of the Secretariat's  documents on mechanisms for consultations with non- governmental organizations. The Chair noted that a contact  group would be created at SBI-7 for consideration of this  item. The SBI also urged all Parties to submit their views  on this item by 25 August.

Other Issues: On 30 July, SBI decided to refer its agenda  item on development and transfer of technology to SBSTA. In  final Plenary, Parties adopted ad referendum draft  conclusions on reducing the volume of documentation and the  calendar of meetings (FCCC/SBI/1997/11). SBI also took note  of the information provided by the Secretariat regarding  UNGASS.

Report of the Meeting: In final Plenary on 5 August, the  Chair noted that most decisions by the contact groups were  outlined in the draft report (FCCC/SBI/1997/L.2). Delegates  reviewed the report of the meeting and adopted it as  amended. The Chair adjourned the meeting at approximately  11:30 am.

# SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE

SBSTA Chair Tibor Faragó (Hungary) opened SBSTA-6 on 28  July and highlighted the interest in enhancing commitments  under the FCCC as expressed at UNGASS. He noted that  Burundi had recently become an FCCC Party and said the  Ukraine and Singapore would soon follow. FCCC Executive  Secretary Michael Zammit-Cutajar noted that while much  attention has focused on the AGBM, the other subsidiary  bodies would also make positive contributions to COP-3. He  expressed concern at the slow pace of submission of  national communications, which are a basic commitment and  affect the Secretariat's ability to compile and synthesize  information.

On the adoption of the agenda, the G-77/CHINA, reserved its  position on addressing methodological issues related to  joint implementation as a separate issue. CHINA proposed  bracketing the item. The US requested an explanation of  this action. The Chair proposed including this item under  the general discussion on activities implemented jointly.  Delegates agreed to consider the item under the discussion  on methodological issues.

On the election of officers, Soobaraj Sok Appadu  (Mauritius) was elected Vice-Chair and Alvaro Jose  Rodriguez Gómez (Colombia) as Rapporteur. On the  organization of work, the Chair proposed establishing  informal groups to consider the division of labor between  SBSTA and SBI. He also proposed establishing a group on  methodological issues, to be chaired by Harald Dovland  (Norway) and SBSTA Vice-Chair Appadu. Thirty-four  delegations expressed interest in participating.

Division of Labor: On 28 July, delegates considered the  document on division of labor (FCCC/SB/1997/2). The  document proposes, inter alia, that only one subsidiary  body would address any particular issue and, if necessary,  the other body would consider certain aspects of the issue.  LUXEMBOURG, on behalf of the EU, along with JAPAN,  supported the proposed approach and, with SWITERLAND,  emphasized the need for education and public awareness.  JAPAN noted that the division of labor for national  communications and AIJ needs clarification. The US noted  that SBSTA should only refine unclear areas rather than  redefine decisions.

Some delegations, including MALAYSIA, SAUDI ARABIA and IRAN  emphasized the importance of technology transfer to  developing countries and the need for more detailed  discussions. Some disagreed with the document's proposal  that SBI only address technology transfer 'at some point in  the future.' CANADA noted that some elements are  appropriate to SBSTA's expertise, while others fall outside  that, such as intellectual property rights, financial  mechanisms and the role of the private sector.

Delegates convened a joint informal group to produce draft  conclusions, which was chaired by Amb. Mark Hambley (US)  and José Romero (Switzerland). The group held consultations  throughout the week and presented its conclusions on 6  August. The same conclusions had been presented and adopted  by SBI (see above).

Methodological Issues: On 28 July, the Chair opened  discussion on methodological issues and financing by noting  that an informal group, chaired by Harald Dovland (Norway),  would also be considering the issue. He urged delegates to  limit their discussion to general comments on the documents  (FCCC/SB/1997/INF.2, FCCC/SBI/1997/10 and  FCCC/SB/1997/INF.1) and leave detailed discourse for the  informal discussions. The EU, the US and JAPAN stated that  the documents were reasonable and useful. However, each  group noted reservations and agreed to participate in  informal discussions. The EU and the US questioned how  funding should be allocated to different bodies. MALAYSIA  noted the importance of methodological issues and called  for an increase in the budget. CHINA called for the work to  be implemented on a regional basis and stressed that this  should be a priority task.

On 29 July, an informal group on methodological issues  heard a presentation by the Secretariat on its  Methodological Work Programme. On 30 July, the  methodological group reported to Plenary that the group had  found little overlap between the work of the Secretariat  and other international organizations. SAUDI ARABIA  objected to the paper to be presented by the methodological  group and stated that the Secretariat should not be given  additional responsibility. He called for a new working  group to discuss Intergovernmental Technical Advisory  Panels (ITAPs) and reminded the Chair of the G-77/CHINA's  proposal on ITAPs.

On 31 July, the Chair of the contact group on methodologies  presented its conclusions in Plenary. The G-77/CHINA  requested more time to consider this paper before approval.  ZIMBABWE noted that there was limited participation from  non-Annex I countries. The methodologies contact group  reconvened for further consultations.

On 5 August, the revised draft conclusions of methodologies  group were presented in the revised report of SBSTA-6.  Regarding the work programme to be conducted by the  Secretariat, SBSTA decided: to give highest priority to  activities relating to methods for GHG inventories; high  priority to projections of GHG emissions and sinks; and  priority to methods for evaluating and monitoring the  effectiveness of specific policies and measures for  assessing adaptation strategies and technologies.

The revised conclusions, inter alia: request the  Secretariat to prepare a progress report on the work  programme on methodologies; note that SBSTA-7 will begin  consideration of appropriate ways to provide terms of  reference for expert contributions and the review of  technical documents; and provide an opportunity for  submitting initial comments on priority areas and options  for work on projections by 20 January 1998. The conclusions  also contain an indicative budget for the methodological  work programme.

On 28 July, delegates considered methodological issues  related to crediting under joint implementation. The US and  the EU supported immediate discussion of this matter and  said that joint implementation would be limited without  resolving the issue of credits. The G-77/CHINA and the  RUSSIAN FEDERATION noted that it was premature to talk  about crediting. They emphasized that joint implementation  is still in its pilot phase with few projects and few  countries involved. NORWAY emphasized that the issue of  crediting is complex and addressing methodology alone may  not be beneficial. He called for a broad examination of the  issue before the specifics of methodology are considered.

The Chair suggested postponing discussion of crediting  until early next year in order to await the political  deliberations that will take place at AGBM. CANADA noted  that each COP is responsible for the review of pilot  projects and was concerned that the issue of crediting was  being ignored.

The Chair called on the US, NORWAY, CANADA and CHINA to  draft a compromise text for consideration in Plenary. On 30  July, the US reported that this small informal group had  not produced agreed text and would continue consultations  until the final SBSTA meeting. On 5 August, CHINA reported  that the group had still not reached agreement. The Chair  proposed that the report of the meeting state that SBSTA  had considered the issue and decided to defer consideration  to a future session. CHINA proposed deleting the reference  to future consideration. The PHILIPPINES asked if the issue  would again be considered a separate agenda item or  together with methodological issues. The US noted the need  for further discussions and that the clearly divergent  views were evidenced by the fact that there are no  conclusions on this matter. Delegates agreed to consider  the issue at a future session.

Cooperation with International Organizations: On 30 July,  delegates considered document FCCC/SBSTA/1997/MISC.4. The  Chair noted that there was little documentation and  encouraged intergovernmental and international  organizations to brief the delegates on their activities.  The International Oceanographic Commission (IOC) cited the  need for modernizing global sea level observations and  called for assistance from international bodies. The  Scientific and Technical Advisory Panel (STAP) to the  Global Environment Facility (GEF) summarized its activities  and workshops on climate change and noted its cooperation  with other international organizations. The World  Meteorological Organization (WMO) reported on the  development of the Climate Agenda and noted that a report  will be submitted to COP-3. The United Nations Environment  Programme (UNEP) stated the importance of equity in  methodological issues and called for a resolution. He noted  the advantages gained by sharing of information between  groups interested in activities implemented jointly (AIJ),  but cautioned that AIJ could weaken the development of  local technologies.

The IPCC stated that the Third Assessment Report (TAR) is  scheduled for completion by the end of 2000. In addition to  physical, chemical and ecological processes, the TAR will  integrate natural and social sciences and address sectoral  issues and regional perspectives. The IPCC will also  produce a 'policy relevant' synthesis report.

LUXEMBOURG, on behalf of the EU, highlighted its submission  containing questions from policy makers, which focuses,  inter alia, on progress in detecting change, non- intervention scenarios and possible policy combinations.  SWITZERLAND noted the importance of disseminating the TAR  results in all UN languages and ensuring adequate resources  for the IPCC secretariat.

CHINA said the TAR should reflect the implementation of  Articles 4.2(a) and (b), and with the US, called for  briefings on the consultations of the Joint Working Group  of the FCCC and IPCC officers. ZIMBABWE, on behalf of the  African Group, as well as CUBA and ZAMBIA, sought stronger  national observation and research systems. She also urged  the IPCC to produce simplified summaries of regional impact  studies and regretted that the GEF did not support UNEP's  proposed climate awareness programme.

The MARSHALL ISLANDS stated that the IPCC should strive for  better information on possible scenarios, such as sea-level  rise and socio-economic impacts resulting from inaction.  Any steps towards a 'user friendly' synthesis report would  assist political leaders. SAMOA cited the fact that some  regions do not have experts in this field as proof of the  need to build capacity. PERU called for work on tropical  forest methodology and the ocean carbon cycle according to  region.

In the report of the meeting, delegates noted the  information provided by the various international  organizations and requested that the Secretariat organize  an informal meeting at SBSTA-7 to discuss key issues to be  addressed in the TAR. Following a US proposal, the  conclusions call upon Parties to work through other  relevant organizations, including the International Civil  Aviation Organization (ICAO) and the International Maritime  Organization (IMO).

National Communications: On 28 July, the Secretariat  introduced documents on communications from Annex I Parties  (FCCC/SB/1997/5) and inventory and projection data  (FCCC/SB/1997/6), which delegates noted without discussion.  On communications from non-Annex I Parties, delegates had  before them documents (FCCC/SBI/1997/9 and  FCCC/SBI/1997/13) and agreed to await the outcome of the  SBI deliberations.

Technology Transfer: On 30 July, the Chair invited comment  on a progress report (FCCC/SB/1997/3), an update on the  report (FCCC/SB/1997/4) and a technical paper on trends and  conditions employed by multilateral lending institutions  (FCCC/TP/1997/1). TANZANIA, on behalf of the G-77/CHINA,  said technology transfer remains an essential component and  priority element of FCCC implementation. SBSTA should  continue to establish expert groups on specific issues  using the roster of experts. ZIMBABWE, on behalf of the  African Group, demanded a reopening of the question of  ITAPs, which could be a first step toward a clearinghouse  mechanism. CHINA said SBSTA should set up ITAPs to  facilitate technology transfer.

The US and the EU suggested that action on ITAPs await a  planned review of the roster at the next SBSTA. JAPAN said  SBSTA should concentrate on updating the roster and should  carefully consider qualifications for ITAPs. MALAYSIA said  ITAPs and the roster should be enhanced to draw expertise  from within governments.

The US said governments' role in technology transfer is to  encourage technology diffusion and remove market barriers.  The focus should be on informing developing country Parties  of channels and conditions for financing. CANADA stated  that the private sector is the preferred vehicle for  technology transfer, with governments playing a  facilitating role. The EU noted the increasing significance  of private sector financial flows and said work related to  public sector financial flows should focus on energy and  transport. UZBEKISTAN suggested an international technology  exchange advisory group.

The draft conclusions on transfer of technologies accepted  on 5 August, state that SBSTA took note of the  Secretariat's technical and progress reports and supported  the Secretariat's plans to prepare reports on the role of  the private sector and on barriers and enabling activities  of governments related to technology transfer. Under the  draft conclusions, SBSTA encouraged the Secretariat to  extend its cooperation with other organizations with the  aim of, inter alia, improving the availability of climate  relevant data. The draft conclusions also state that SBSTA  discussed ITAPs and noted that the Secretariat has been  requested to prepare a report on its experience using the  roster of experts. It recalled that the subject of ITAPs,  including their possible establishment, would be considered  by SBSTA-7. Parties may submit proposals on the issue until  31 August 1997. SBSTA welcomed the Secretariat's use of the  roster in three expert meetings on technology and  technology transfer issues and recalled its request to  Parties to nominate experts for the roster.

Activities Implemented Jointly: On 28 July, delegates  discussed activities implemented jointly (AIJ) under the  pilot phase in Plenary. The Secretariat introduced document  FCCC/SBSTA/1997/INF.2, which contains a list of projects  that have been accepted, approved or endorsed by the  designated national authorities.

The EU called for the establishment of a credible baseline  that would reflect what would have happened in the absence  of an AIJ project. The calculation of the benefits should  be transparent and include only those leading to genuine  GHG reductions. She noted that further work was required on  technology-specific baselines and third party verification.  The US noted that a considerable amount of progress on  practical options can be identified, and highlighted  several aspects of criteria for assessing AIJ, such as  monitoring and verifying results, quantification of project  costs and measuring emission benefits. He underscored the  need to examine links between these issues and credits. The  US and CANADA said the Secretariat's forthcoming synthesis  document should begin to draw conclusions from AIJ  projects. NORWAY highlighted national experience in AIJ and  noted efforts to develop a portfolio of projects with a  view to balancing sectors and technologies. COSTA RICA said  the willingness to pay for GHG reductions through AIJ is  linked to financing and stressed the need for crediting.

ZIMBABWE, CHINA, KUWAIT and MALAYSIA cautioned against  forming premature conclusions on AIJ based on the pilot  phase. ZIMBABWE and CHINA said it would not be possible to  assess the effectiveness of AIJ by 2000. SAUDI ARABIA said  many activities had been initiated to reaffirm the idea of  AIJ and noted that project approval by the host government  is not a sign of success because some countries lack the  capacity to judge benefits. SAMOA noted that only 12  Parties, two from Annex I, were currently involved in AIJ  activities. While significant opportunities for AIJ exist  worldwide, few countries in the Asia-Pacific region have an  understanding of this issue.

In the report of the meeting, SBSTA took note with  appreciation of the Secretariat's information on AIJ and  the ongoing work in the field.

Report of the session: On 30 July, Rapporteur Alvaro J.  Rodriguez (Colombia) introduced the draft 'skeleton' report  of SBSTA (FCCC/SBSTA/1997/CRP.2), which delegates amended  and adopted. On 5 August, delegates discussed the remaining  issues on their agenda, considered a revised draft report  of the meeting (FCCC/SBSTA/1997/L.4), and heard a  presentation on the SBI workshop on Annex I communications.  SBSTA took note of the methodological issues outlined in  the workshop report. Delegates adopted the report, as  amended, and the Chair adjourned the meeting at 5:00 pm.

# AD HOC GROUP ON ARTICLE 13

On 28 July, Chair Patrick Széll (UK) opened the fifth  session of the Ad Hoc Group on Article 13 (AG13-5), the  last AG13 meeting before COP3. He recalled that at AG13-4  some progress had been made, mainly due to the decision  that AG13 should not aim to conclude its work before COP-4,  pending a decision by the AGBM on the nature of the  compliance regime.

The Chair called attention to the draft Multilateral  Consultative Process (MCP) (FCCC/AG13/1997/2, Annex II)  containing proposals on functions and procedures with a  number of bracketed references. He indicated that  additional submissions by Switzerland and Uzbekistan had  been circulated (FCCC/AG13/1 997/Misc.2).

The Chair requested that delegations circulate amendments  on the draft MCP immediately to allow for their  consideration overnight. The Chair also outlined a draft  decision he had prepared for COP-3 requesting provision for  two more AG13 sessions, each lasting six half-days, with  the aim of completing work by COP-4.  Meeting the target  date would not be guaranteed.

On the scope and elements of an MCP, the Chair invited  comments on the ordering of paragraphs in the MCP  compilation text. The EU said the opening paragraph should  refer to a 'process' as mandated by FCCC Article 13.  Reference to the establishment of a committee should follow  later. The US warned against getting ahead of COP-3 and  added that he was not in a position to endorse any course  of action for AG13. The Chair invited comments on the first  paragraph of the MCP compilation. Parties discussed: the  introduction of a reference to FCCC Article 13; whether the  paragraph should refer only to the establishment of a  committee or to a process with a subsequent paragraph on a  committee, or both; whether such a committee should be  'standing' or 'ad hoc;' and whether a committee should  report directly to the COP or to the SBI.

On 29 July, delegates engaged in a paragraph-by-paragraph  review of the draft compilation of proposals. Parties  agreed on a reformulated introductory paragraph prepared by  a working group chaired by Zimbabwe. The paragraph  establishes the MCP as a set of procedures to be served by  a committee. There was no agreement on whether the  committee should be standing or ad hoc or whether it should  be established under the SBI.

On a paragraph that sets out objectives, the Chair noted an  EU proposal, supported by SWITZERLAND and AUSTRALIA, to  refer to the 'process' rather than the committee. The US,  supported by SAUDI ARABIA, proposed that the MCP provide  Parties with advice on 'their' implementation of the  Convention. The EU said Article 13 of the FCCC refers to  advice on 'the' implementation.

On related subparagraphs, there was no agreement on the  objectives of promoting understanding of the Convention and  preventing disputes. The Chair noted support from IRAN,  CHILE and CHINA for the inclusion of the provision of  assistance to Parties together with an EU suggestion that  the committee advise other elements of the FCCC on  providing financial and technological assistance.

The Chair agreed to note IRAN's proposal, supported by  SAUDI ARABIA, to reformulate three subparagraphs to read:  'Providing [consultative] assistance to the Parties in need  in order to facilitate implementation of the Convention and  finding solutions to the possible problems in this regard.'  The Chair noted that the question of providing assistance  was likely to continue to haunt the Parties.

AUSTRALIA and the US objected to a suggestion by  SWITZERLAND, supported by FRANCE, that the objectives  include a reference to a protocol. The Chair advised  Parties to forget references to a protocol until next year.

The Chair said a paragraph stating that the MCP will be  separate from and without prejudice to the provisions of  FCCC Article 14 (settlement of disputes) is based on  wording from the Montreal Protocol. SAUDI ARABIA recalled  that FCCC Article 13 is not a non-compliance procedure. The  Chair invited Parties to ask whether the MCP's relationship  to the settlement of disputes in FCCC Article 14 arose at  all, given its 'helpline' nature.

Delegates also discussed a paragraph concerning the  committee mandate. It was agreed that the title should be  changed to 'Mandate of the Committee.' There was  significant debate on provision of assistance to Parties,  including proposals by CHINA, SWITZERLAND, the EU and the  US. SWITZERLAND agreed to go along with the EU proposal  that assistance should consist of advice and  recommendations on technical and financial aspects. The  remaining proposals will appear in the new compilation  text. There was considerable debate on the role of the COP.

On 30 July, AG13-5 considered the draft report to COP-3  (FCCC/AG13/1997/CRP.2). The draft report states that the  establishment of any MCP must be within the framework of  the FCCC. AG13's next session will consider whether to  adjust its framework draft text in light of the AGBM  negotiations. Parties decided to hold two more sessions of  six and eight meetings to complete work before COP-4. The  entire framework text remains in brackets.

In the introductory paragraph the options describing the  MCP procedures as 'ad hoc' or 'standing' remain in  brackets. Each of the proposals on objectives of the MCP, a  new proposal on providing consultative assistance to  Parties, and elements in the proposed Mandate of the  Committee are also bracketed. Decisions have also been held  over on questions of how issues will be taken up by the  MCP, and whether one or more Parties will be involved in  making submissions. In the Outcome section, a paragraph  that would subject conclusions and recommendations from the  MCP to the consent of the Party or Parties concerned  remains in brackets.

The EU, supported by CHILE, SAUDI ARABIA and SWITZERLAND  called for at least two more AG13 sessions, each lasting  eight half-days and, with KUWAIT and FRANCE, called for a  stronger commitment to completion of work by COP-4. The US  and CHINA did not agree. Chair Szell modified the draft  decision for COP-3 (FCCC/AG13/1997/CRP.2 Annex III) to  indicate that AG13 should continue beyond the COP, invite  AG13 to complete its work by COP-4 and request it to report  to COP-4 on progress if it fails to meet the target date.  He also amended the draft report (Organizational Matters)  to indicate that AG13 will require two further sessions  each consisting of about six to eight meetings.

Reviewing the draft compilation for a Multilateral  Consultative Process (MCP) (Annex II), in a paragraph  describing how issues are to be taken up, CHINA asked for  the re-insertion of a reference, in brackets, to  consideration of any submission made by 'a Party on its own  request.' KUWAIT, CHINA and SAUDI ARABIA questioned the  adequacy of a decision to cross-reference this procedural  paragraph in an earlier paragraph on the Mandate of the  Committee.

Rapporteur Andrej Kranjc (Slovenia) presented the draft  report of AG13-5 for adoption. The Chair noted that  detailed discussions would be needed at AG13-6 on:  assistance to Parties; the question of who can trigger  proceedings; and the implications of COP-3.

# A BRIEF ANALYSIS OF THE AGBM

Now that AGBM-7 is history, many may ask if governments are  any closer to reaching agreement on strengthening the  Framework Convention on Climate Change. Alas, an assessment  of just how much was achieved is as open to interpretation  as was the much disputed status of Schubert's 'unfinished  symphony.' To make such an assessment, three key questions  were put to delegates and observers as they moved between  the Beethoven, Schubert and Haydn Rooms at the Maritim  Hotel during AGBM-7: where did the movement or progress  occur in this round of negotiations; what are the emerging  linkages or tradeoffs; and what are the key opportunities  in the all-important forthcoming intersessional period to  advance the process to achieve an outcome acceptable in the  eyes of the Parties.

### THE AGBM'S SEVENTH MOVEMENT

In the absence of initial  formal proposals for emissions reduction targets by the US  and Japan, there was a widespread sense that most of the  progress achieved at this session was limited to a  reduction in the number of proposals in Chair Estrada- Oyuela's negotiating text. One NGO hoped that Parties might  now begin to distance themselves from ownership of  individual proposals and recognize the Chair's forthcoming  text at AGBM-8 as more of a common enterprise. Others were  less than impressed. They suggested that some negotiating  positions had hardened while some Parties, clearly  determined to distance themselves from the whole process,  had tabled unrealistic proposals to cover their retreat.

Stepping tentatively toward negotiation, the US went some  way towards accepting, in principle, the so called European  'bubble' concept, i.e. internally differentiating targets  for emission reductions. The EU made it clear that they  would accept trading if the levels of targets agreed under  the Berlin Mandate are 'adequate.' Another development has  been the shift in the OECD countries' position on a  comprehensive approach. A majority of these countries now  view the multiple gases approach as a way of delivering  stronger targets -- something they could not be confident  about in regard to CO2. An issue that is now likely to  emerge is the complexity of the monitoring regime required.  A 'qualified comprehensive approach' may emerge, with an  initial focus on industrial gases. A third shift was the  proposal by Brazil, the first large developing country to  envision a future in which all countries adopt new  commitments and the first outside AOSIS to discuss targets.

The EU's bid for a leadership role on strong targets along  with policies and measures was frustrated by the near  absence of support from other developed countries and the  G-77. One observer's explanation for the absence of that  support in the case of the G-77/CHINA referred to  Tanzania's leadership role within the G-77/CHINA,  compounded by the political dynamic in the group. The  Tanzanian Chair, new to the intergovernmental process but  an expert in the issues, stuck hard and fast to the group  principle that no position should be adopted where one  member dissents. This principle stems from what has been  described as a 'false sense of brotherhood' defined by an  unwavering opposition to the OECD. Whoever manipulates that  opposition effectively tends to win out within the group.  This helps to explain the influence of a handful of  countries in the G-77/CHINA decision-making process. Saudi  Arabia, for example, reportedly managed to become more  entrenched than ever as a key player within the Group at  this session of the AGBM and was allowed to present the  Group's position on a couple of occasions.

Other key players also attracted criticism. While the  Clinton administration has been moving toward a strong  stand on climate change policy, it has been reported that  opponents of the administration 'caused havoc' and even  engaged in attempts to undermine and discredit the US  delegation in Bonn. The intense domestic political battles  in the US were, in effect, being played out around the  edges of the negotiations at the AGBM, helping to put the  brakes on progress. A remotely controlled intervention in  the process came via the Senate resolution demanding that  the US negotiators dig their heels in to avoid any  unilateral commitments by industrialized countries. A co- sponsor of the resolution, West Virginia Senator Robert  Byrd, privately lobbied Chair Estrada but got short shrift.

An academic observer suggested that the G-77/China position  had hardened in response to the Senate resolution and US  calls for an evolutionary approach to the Berlin Mandate.  He agreed with speculation that this outcome was the  objective of some sophisticated lobbying by US  industrialists who were determined to attack the 'soft  underbelly,' of the process, i.e. exploiting the North- South tensions and fears about losing jobs at home.

The domestic difficulties of the US are echoed somewhat in  Japan. The latter's difficulties are compounded by the  responsibilities that go with playing host to a major UN  conference, a privilege which must now appear to some in  Tokyo as a poison chalice. Japan's domestic constituency is  for the most part in favor of a strong protocol. Initial  signals on Japanese targets -- proposals permitting some  developed country emission increases tentatively floated in  the corridors -- met with a hostile reception from NGOs.  One senior European observer marked this down as a notable  political development in itself. Observers further noted  that this kind of public pressure from NGOs will be an  important element of remaining negotiations despite the  'lock-out' from formal meetings.

Political tensions in Japan as to what type of targets to  support are reflected in political divisions between  Japanese government ministries, with serious concern at the  Ministry of International Trade and Industry. The Prime  Minister is expected to intervene soon to 'knock heads  together' to avoid an embarrassing struggle at Kyoto and --  above all -- to avoid surprises.

### NORTH-SOUTH OVERTURES

Even rabid 'evolutionists' do not  necessarily insist that the new developing country actions  take place now, but that they must establish some mechanism  that will consider when those actions may occur and how  they may be determined. Observers say that scheduled  reviews of commitments under the FCCC could provide a venue  for considering developing country actions that is  politically linked to but formally separate from a new  protocol or legal instrument agreed in Kyoto. The review of  annexes is another tool cited by observers as a means of  extending the group of countries taking primary  responsibility for FCCC commitments. Both of these  approaches could leave the onus of responsibility on Annex  I countries while eventually answering the concern that all  parties participate. Presentation and appearance are often  key to political success, and the presentation of a two- part package -- with the non-Annex I Parties on board for  Berlin Mandate - The Sequel -- could offer a solution.

In this regard, some observers were surprised to find that  the US had not pushed harder in its negotiations on Article  4.1. They concluded that the delegation had decided to 'put  most of their eggs into another basket,' i.e. the demand  for an evolutionary approach to the Berlin Mandate  (bringing developing countries in sooner rather than  later), focusing on a review of the adequacy of commitments  and joint implementation. This may explain Chair Estrada's  decision to avoid an 'explosion' and leave evolution and  review of adequacy out of his negotiating text.

### AN INSTRUMENT FOR FOUR SEASONS

The headline issues of  greenhouse gas emission targets and timetables are so far  untouchable, quietly muffled beneath the shade of the  obscure term 'QELROs.' The lack of specific target  proposals from two of the largest GHG producers places a  hold on that aspect of the process. So much so that the  Chair of the QELROs non-group speculated that an attempt to  address them might embarrass some Parties.

Whether policies and measures should be legally binding or  not, is another issue yet to be resolved. Although there  are provisions in the current draft to the effect that  Parties must draw up binding national plans for limiting  and reducing anthropogenic emissions by sources and  enhancing removal by sinks, there is a draft escape clause  that states: 'Parties will continue to retain maximum  flexibility in deciding how best, based on their national  circumstances, they can reach emission limitation/reduction  objectives.' The ongoing debate over flexibility resumes in  the discussion of policies and measures. There seems to be  a tendency to accept that some P&Ms will be classified as  mandatory, but which ones, how many and other details are  far from clear.

Regarding whether objectives shall be achieved individually  or jointly, a distinction was established whereby  commitments will be met individually, but P&M's may be  undertaken in a common/coordinated way. Further  clarification will be needed on how the common/coordinated  approach will operate. A reference was made to a  coordination process to be instituted under SBSTA to  develop guidelines for implementing the common measures set  out in both mandatory and high priority P&Ms. The inclusion  of an 'Annex Q1' of countries that are to take measures to  mitigate climate change hints at another route to inclusion  of non-Annex I Parties in new commitments.

### INTERLUDE

The intersessional period leading up to AGBM-8  in October and the period between AGBM-8 and COP-3 will  undoubtedly assume unusual significance. Key events along  the way will be an imminent intersessional meeting in  Germany to be chaired by Estrada, a White House meeting in  October when targets may be announced, a Japanese-hosted  meeting for 10 Annex I Parties in early September, EU-US  bilaterals, and a G-7+I meeting in November. Estrada is  also expected to conduct other informal consultations.

### REPRISE

The real world political and economic global order  as we enter the 21st century is more complex than it was  when climate change arrived on the political agenda -- a  fact that raises all kinds of contradictions in the  structure of the FCCC, not least the question of who really  belongs in Annex I and Annex II and the distribution of  responsibility. Weighed against that observation is the  fact that debts to history -- notably the history of North- South relations and that of industrial GHG emissions--  survive much longer than contemporary economic trends.

While climate change is undoubtedly an environmental issue  -- the paramount issues at the AGBM are increasingly  exposed as questions concerning the concealed political and  economic costs of the industrialized world's free ride to  unsustainable development. Whether Berlin Mandate  negotiators will produce what one observer called 'an  impossible mass' to resolve at Kyoto, or the critical mass  to address an objective to which all Parties have already  committed, must become clearer with the passing of the  seasons.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR IN THE INTERSESSIONAL PERIOD

### FCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES

The next sessions of the subsidiary  bodies are scheduled to take place in Bonn from 20-31  October 1997. SBI and SBSTA will meet from 20-22 October  and will hold their final sessions during the second week.  The remainder of the time will be devoted to AGBM. AG13  will not meet. The third Conference of the Parties (COP-3)  is scheduled for 1-10 December 1997 in Kyoto, Japan. For  all meetings related to the FCCC, contact the secretariat  in Bonn, Germany; tel: +49-228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815- 1999; e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.de. Also try the FCCC home  page at http://www.unfccc.de and UNEP's Information Unit  for Conventions at http://www.unep.ch/iuc.html.

### TRAINING WORKSHOP ON PRESENTING NATIONAL IMPLEMENTATION  STRATEGIES

The Training Workshop on Presenting National  Implementation Strategies will be held from 25-27 August  1997 in Lima, Peru. The objective is to prepare national  implementation strategies. For more information contact  Stephen Gold, CC:TRAIN; tel: +41-22-733-1383; fax: +41-22- 733-1383; e-mail: sgold.unitar@unep.ch.

### AFRICAN REGIONAL WORKSHOP ON THE PREPARATION OF INITIAL  NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS

This workshop will be held from  28-30 August 1997 in Dakar, Senegal. The workshop, which  will be held in English and French, will cover a wide range  of issues and focus on the specific and needs of African  countries. Working Groups will be established for different  thematic areas. For information contact: Youba Sokona,  ENDA-Energy; tel: +221-225-983; fax: +221-217-595.

### US REGIONAL CLIMATE CHANGE WORKSHOPS

Regional workshops  will examine the vulnerabilities of various regions of the  US to climate variability and climate change and to  aggregate information across regions to support national- scale scientific assessment. The New England Workshop will  be held from 3-5 September 1997 in Durham, New Hampshire.  For more information contact: Clara Kustra; tel: +1-603- 862-3484; fax: +1-603-862-1915; e-mail: clara@unh.edu. Also  try http://www.necci.sr.unh.edu/. The Southwest Regional  Workshop will be held from 3-4 September 1997 in Tucson,  Arizona. For more information contact Jon Unruh; tel: +1- 520-621-7189; e-mail: unruhj@u.arizona.edu. Also try:  http://vpr2.admin.arizona.edu/udall_center/CLIMATE.HTM. The  National Workshop on Climate Change Impacts will be held  from 10-12 November 1997 in Washington, DC.

### TRAINING WORKSHOP ON PRESENTING NATIONAL IMPLEMENTATION  STRATEGIES

The Training Workshop on Presenting National  Implementation Strategies will be held from 15-19 September  1997 in Senegal. The objective is to train participants to  prepare national implementation strategies. For more  information contact Stephen Gold, CC:TRAIN; tel: +41-22- 733-1383; fax: +41-22-733-1383; e-mail:  sgold.unitar@unep.ch.

### REGIONAL WORKSHOP ON CLEAN ENERGY TECHNOLOGIES, PROJECT  DEVELOPMENT AND FINANCE FOR ECONOMIES IN TRANSITION

This  workshop, scheduled from 22-26 September 1997 in Budapest,  Hungary, will provide a forum for the facilitation of  projects on greenhouse gas mitigation technologies between  energy efficiency and renewable energy project developers  and the international financial community. For information  contact: Christopher Bordeaux; tel: +1-202-586-3070; fax:  +1-202-586-3485/3486; e-mail:  christopher.bordeaux@hq.doe.gov.

### KLIMA 97 LEIPZIG

This conference and trade fair,  scheduled from 25-28 September 1997 in Leipzig, Germany,  encompasses all technical, scientific, economic and social  measures relating to the protection and preservation of the  climate. For information contact: Ingomar Brandl, UTEC  International Kongress-und Ausstellungs-Service GmbH,  Hainstrasse 16, D-04109 Leipzig; tel: + 49-341- 960-6797;  fax + 49-341-960 6798.

### GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS TRADING MEETING

The OECD  Environmental Directorate will hold a meeting to discuss  'International Greenhouse Gas Emission Trading' from 29-30  September 1997 in Paris. For more information contact the  OECD; tel: +33-01-45-24-82-00; fax: +33-01-45-24-85-00; e- mail: news.contact@oecd.org. Also try http://www.oecd.org/.

### LATIN AMERICAN REGIONAL WORKSHOP ON PREPARATION OF NATIONAL  COMMUNICATIONS

This workshop will be held in Itaipu,  Brazil, from 30 September - 2 October 1997 and will be held  in Spanish and Portuguese. It will include individual  country presentations on the status of the preparation of  national communications and include rapporteurs reporting  back on thematic issues for group discussions. For more  information contact: John O'Brien, UNDP/GEF in New York;  tel: +1-212-906-6033; fax: +1-212-908-6998.

### TRAINING WORKSHOP ON PREPARING IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES

The Training Workshop on Preparing National Implementation  Strategies will be held from 29 September - 3 October 1997  in Benin. Other training workshops will be held in Chad  from 20-24 October 1997 and in Bolivia from 5-7 November  1997. The objectives is to train participants to prepare  national implementation strategies. For more information  contact Stephen Gold, CC:TRAIN; tel: +41-22-733-1383; fax:  +41-22-733-1383; e-mail: sgold.unitar@unep.ch

### INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON ENERGY AND THE ENVIRONMENT,  EFFICIENT UTILIZATION OF ENERGY AND WATER RESOURCES

This  conference is scheduled from 12-14 October 1997 in  Limassol, Cyprus. For information contact: Dr. Savvas  Tassou, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Brunel  University, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UB8 3PH, United Kingdom;  Fax: +44 (0)1895-256392; e-mail:  savvas.tassou@brunel.ac.uk.

### ASIA-PACIFIC INITIATIVE FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY AND ENERGY  EFFICIENCY 97

Asia Pacific Initiative for Renewable  Energy & Energy Efficiency 97 will be held from 14-16  October 1997 in Jakarta, Indonesia and is sponsored by  Alternative Development Asia; tel: +852-257-49133; fax:  +852-257-41997; e-mail: altdev@hk.spuer.net.

### CONFERENCE ON CLIMATE CHANGE

The Conference 'Targeting  Kyoto and Beyond,' sponsored by Climate Network Europe  (CNE), the Global Legislators Organization for a Balanced  Environment (GLOBE-EU) and Germanwatch, will be held from  16-17 October 1997 at the Bundestag in Bonn, Germany. The  Conference will feature a parliamentarians workshop, a  ministerial panel and a business roundtable. For  information contact: CNE; tel: +32-2-231-01-80; fax: +32-2- 230-57-13; e-mail: canron@gn.apc.org.