---
title: "INC-11 HIGHLIGHTS: MONDAY, 13 FEBRUARY 1995"
id: 1207000e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/1207000e
date: 1995-02-13
abstract: "On Monday morning, the Plenary first heard reports on  progress to date and then discussed the designation of the  Permanent Secretariat and arrangements for its functioning.  Working Group I met to discuss subsidiary bodies. In the  afternoon, a plethora contact and drafting groups met  throughout the UN basement."
---

# PLENARY

The meeting began with progress reports from the Co-Chairs  of Working Groups I and II. The Working Group I Co-Chair  said the group had made considerable progress over the last  week. The Group considered all five agenda items and the Co- Chair reported the following: 1) Methodological Issues - the  Group reached agreement and can finalize its recommendation  for a draft decision for COP-1; 2) Review of information  communicated from Annex 1 Parties - the Co-Chairs circulated  a draft decision for COP-1; 3) Subsidiary Bodies - the Co- Chairs circulated a draft text last week; 4) Review of  Adequacy of Commitments - the Group has concluded its  discussion, and the Co-Chairs are drafting a decision that  will be ready soon; 5) Joint Implementation - the Group is  now working on a text. The Chair asked whether the draft  decision on Review of Communication would name specific  countries, and the Co-Chair assured him that it would.

The Co-Chair of Working Group II reported that the Group had  covered all items, but must make 'major progress' if the  Group plans to have recommendations for COP-I. He reported  the following: 1) Interim Arrangements - the Group agreed  that the GEF will remain the operating mechanism on an  interim basis and will be reviewed within four years; 2)  Modalities has four major sub-topics. On the format of the  agreement, the Parties said they would need to know content  before making a final decision. On the content, the Parties  have generally agreed with the Secretariat's suggestions. On  the assessment of funding needs, the Group has not reached  agreement. On the process of interim arrangements, the Group  endorsed continuing consultation between the Interim  Secretariat and the GEF Secretariat to draft an arrangement;  3) Policy Guidance - the Co-Chair said his current text  indicates areas of disagreement with bracketed text; and 4)  Technical and Financial Support for Developing Countries -  the Group has agreed on some areas and will continue its  discussion on Tuesday.

The Chair then gave the floor to an NGO representative from  the Climate Action Network. The speaker was disappointed  with INC-11 thus far, and said the AOSIS proposal was  'everyone's opportunity for survival.' He also stressed the  need for better leadership from developed countries, and  criticized the performance of the US and Germany.

AGENDA ITEM 5(b) - DESIGNATION OF THE PERMANENT SECRETARIAT  AND ARRANGEMENTS FOR ITS FUNCTIONING: The Interim  Secretariat introduced document A/AC.237/79/Add.2, on the  financial rules of the COP and its subsidiary bodies, and  corrigenda 1 and 2. He also introduced A/AC.237/79/Add.5, a  Contact Group paper on the Permanent Secretariat, and  highlighted the following: paragraph 8, which suggests a  review of the budget by a small representative group before  consideration by the COP; paragraph 9, which emphasizes the  procedure of adopting a budget by consensus; and paragraph  10, which recommends using the UN scale for contributions.  The paragraph contains a ceiling, but exempts no party. When  the Interim Secretariat introduced Annex 1 to  A/AC.237/79/Add.2, he commented on paragraph 2, which  specifies a biennium financial period, and paragraph 3,  which contains bracketed language on the deadline for  drawing up the administrative budget. Paragraph 4 contains  two options for review of the budget: the COP could  establish a Financial Committee or avail itself of the UN  Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions  (ACABQ). He noted the Contact Group prefers the first  alternative, with advice from the ACABQ.

The Chair then opened the floor for comments. The EU and the  US supported Annex I and specifically noted paragraph 6,  which requires the adoption of the budget by consensus, and  suggested that the scale of contributions mentioned in  paragraph 9 be more explicit. The EU noted that many  provisions common to environmental agreements are not  included here, such as a requirement for consensus for  amendments to financial rules, and a provision for  reallocating the balance of assets should a fund be  dissolved. The EU also stated that these budgetary matters  cannot be properly considered in Plenary, and recommended  establishing an open-ended group to consider Annex I. The US  and Australia supported the need for a reserve fund, but  Japan and the Russian Federation expressed concern over the  amount.

Benin commented on paragraph 10 of A/AC.237/79/Add.5, on  contributions, and recommended providing for a floor as well  as a ceiling. The Chair replied that the original document  had contained such a provision, but many developing  countries requested its deletion. The proposal is based on  the UN scale of contributions and provides for a minimum of  0.01%.

The G-77, supported by Algeria and Brazil, noted that two  considerations must be taken into account: the determination  of developing country contributions on the ability to pay,  and the principle that no developing country must pay more  than any developed country. The Secretariat replied that the  UN scale was chosen because it reflected the ability to pay.  Algeria commented that the UN scale did not take into  account the principle of 'common but differentiated'  responsibilities.

The Interim Secretariat introduced document  A/AC.237/79/Add.3, on the budget outline for the Permanent  Secretariat, and noted that it is still unclear exactly what  is expected of the Secretariat and how much governments are  prepared to pay for it. He explained that unlike other  convention secretariats, this Secretariat will deal with  global energy use, which is much broader than the scope of  CITES or the Montreal Protocol, and comparisons to the  secretariats for international policy reviews, such as the  OECD or the trade policy mechanism under GATT, were more  accurate.

The EU expressed the need for a more detailed budget, and  noted that the composition of the ACABQ did not coincide  with the Parties to the Convention. The Interim Secretariat  replied that the ACABQ, a standing body, was only included  to alleviate concerns about the new Secretariat and that  more guidance was needed from the Parties before they could  develop a detailed budget. Benin asked about staff  recruitment and the voluntary fund. The Secretariat  responded that staff size will depend on the size of the  COP, and that the voluntary fund is entirely dependent upon  contributions.

AGENDA ITEM 4(a) -- LINKAGES: The Chair introduced  A/AC.237/79/Add.5 on the institutional linkages between the  Secretariat and the UN Secretariat. He highlighted  paragraphs 3, 4, 5 and 6, the essential elements of the  arrangements, and added that A/AC.237/79/Add.6 will be  available on Tuesday.

# WORKING GROUP I

AGENDA ITEM 7(a) - REVIEW OF NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS:  Working Group I postponed discussion on the review of  national communications to permit the G-77 and China to  discuss the Co-Chairs' draft.

AGENDA ITEM 7(e) - SUBSIDIARY BODIES: The Philippines, on  behalf of the G-77 and China, suggested adding language  after paragraph 7 of the draft decision to schedule no more  than two meetings - one to coincide with the COP and one  intersessional. He said it was difficult for developing  countries to send representatives to more meetings. The  Chair recommended waiting on scheduling until the issue is  resolved in the Rules of Procedure.

The Philippines, on behalf of the G-77 and China, suggested  adding 'competent international bodies' after 'provided by'  and cutting the phrase 'especially in support of the review  of adequacy of commitments' in the first bullet of Appendix  1. The US recommended 'competent bodies' to permit other  than international bodies. Denmark said review of the  adequacy of commitments was important and should not be  removed. Saudi Arabia suggested adding 'economic' to  'scientific, technical and other information.' Kuwait  suggested using 'socioeconomic.' It was agreed that  'competent bodies' and 'socioeconomic' would be added, but  that the last phrase would remain unchanged.

The Philippines suggested combining the second and third  bullets of Appendix 1 to read, 'On behalf of the Conference  of Parties request climate change related scientific  research from competent international bodies, including  inter alia, IPCC; compile and synthesize scientific and  technical information on the global situation in climate  change.' The US asked whether it was intended to leave out  'the latest developments in science, to the extent possible,  and assess the implications thereof.' The Philippines said  implications were covered by references to assessments  elsewhere in the draft. Uruguay objected since the amendment  questioned the role of the IPCC by giving other  organizations comparable status. The Chair suggested  inserting 'Under the guidance of the COP' at the beginning  of the section, rather than in the bullet. The Philippines  agreed to retain the deleted phrases. Switzerland objected  to using new language in 'climate change related scientific  research information.' The Chair's recommendation to combine  bullets 2 and 3 and add the word 'socioeconomic' was  accepted. Saudi Arabia asked that 'socioeconomic' be added  wherever 'scientific and technical' appear in the draft.

Under 9.2(b), the Philippines, on behalf of the G-77 and  China, added 'of Annex 1 Parties' after 'national  communications.' The Chair said that the recommendation is a  permanent item and thus could apply to non-Annex I Parties  in three years. New Zealand suggested adding 'including the  guidelines for their preparation' to 'Make recommendations  on the technical aspects related to the review of  information contained in national communications.' The  Philippines said the G-77 and China could give provisional  approval to New Zealand's proposed amendment.

# IN THE CORRIDORS I

A contact group of 16 countries met Monday afternoon to  resolve the remaining issues related to joint  implementation. The G-77 and China were represented by  Argentina, Benin, China, Costa Rica, Malaysia, Nigeria,  Saudi Arabia and Trinidad and Tobago. The EU was represented  by Denmark, Germany and the Netherlands. The JUSCANZ group  was represented by Australia, the US and a country to be  nominated, and the Eastern European Group was represented by  the Czech Republic and Russia. The group agreed on the basic  concepts describing JI and identified areas of divergence,  including participation. Members agreed to continue  discussions on areas of divergence as well as the pilot  phase, which the group has not yet addressed.

# IN THE CORRIDORS II

By the conclusion of the afternoon's informal drafting group  meeting on the Rules of Procedure, delegates reported mixed  results. While agreement was reached on Rule 12 (submission  of agenda items), two other rules were re-opened. No  progress was made on Rule 4 (no sessions during sacred  religious holidays) or on Rule 42 (voting procedures), which  affects the fate of the AOSIS draft protocol. The question  is whether protocols must be adopted by a three-fourths or  two-thirds majority vote, where there is no consensus. If  delegates do not reach agreement, it is likely that the COP  will follow the precedent of the Biodiversity Conference of  the Parties, which left the voting rules in brackets when  the Rules of Procedure were adopted.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### WORKING GROUP I

Working Group I will hear an NGO statement  from the International Council on Local Environmental  Initiative, and then resume informal consultations on the  Co-Chairs' draft recommendations and decisions on Agenda  Item 7(e), subsidiary bodies, and Agenda Item 7(a), review  of national communications.

### WORKING GROUP II

Working Group II is expected to address a  number of outstanding matters, including policy guidelines  and modalities for the financial mechanism, technical  cooperation by non-Annex I Parties, and technical and  financial support to developing countries.