---
title: "UNFCCC COP-6 HIGHLIGHTS, WEDNESDAY, 22 NOVEMBER 2000"
id: enb12161e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12161e
date: 2000-11-22
abstract: "Delegates convened in Plenary to hear statements from 34 Parties,  thus completing the high-level segment that began on Tuesday.  Senior government representatives also met in informal high-level  Plenary sessions and closed informal consultations to advance  negotiations on key outstanding issues. These negotiations focused  on the following four 'clusters' or 'boxes' of key issues  identified by COP-6 President Pronk: (a) capacity building,  technology transfer, adverse effects and guidance to the GEF; (b)  the mechanisms; (c) land use, land-use change and forestry  (LULUCF); and (d) policies and measures (P&Ms), compliance, and  accounting, reporting and review under Protocol Articles 5, 7 and  8."
---

# PLENARY

### STATEMENTS BY PARTIES

Delegates heard formal statements by high- level representatives from 34 Parties.

<Editor's Note: A complete collection of Plenary Statements will  soon be available at: http://COP-6.unfccc.int> Many speakers highlighted the importance of maintaining the  environmental integrity of the Protocol. A number of statements  also underscored the principle of common but differentiated  responsibilities under the Protocol. In addition, many speakers  urged ratification and entry into force of the Protocol in 2002.

UNFCCC and Protocol Commitments: A number of developing countries  said Annex I Parties had not taken adequate measures to meet their  commitments, and urged concrete action. SPAIN emphasized the  importance of recognizing developing countries' needs. The  PHILIPPINES expressed dismay that a small number of 'essential'  Parties were holding up the process and attempting to 'skew the  rules in their favor,' which he said would result in increases  rather than cuts in their emissions. KUWAIT opposed the imposition  of any additional obligations on developing countries.

Kyoto Mechanisms: Several countries emphasized that domestic  actions should form the primary means for meeting Protocol  commitments on reducing greenhouse gas emissions. TUVALU expressed  concern at the possible creation of loopholes under the  mechanisms.

On the CDM, many countries supported a 'prompt' start, and a  number of developing countries highlighted the need for equitable  distribution of projects. The GAMBIA supported a positive list of  non-contentious, credible renewable energy and demand-side  technologies. BHUTAN emphasized the need for active participation  by the least developed countries (LDCs), suggesting their  exemption from an adaptation surcharge. SOUTH AFRICA and TANZANIA  said the adaptation levy on the CDM should also apply to the other  mechanisms.

On sinks in the CDM, GUATEMALA, opposed by TUVALU and GREECE,  supported their inclusion. TANZANIA opposed inclusion of sinks at  this time, citing issues of permanence, leakage and sovereignty.  THAILAND said including sinks in the CDM should not be permitted  until scientific uncertainties have been resolved. GUATEMALA  supported the inclusion of sinks. On nuclear energy in the CDM,  GREECE and TUVALU opposed inclusion.

Land use, land-use change and forestry: MALAYSIA and THAILAND  opposed inclusion of additional activities under Protocol Article  3.4 in the first commitment period.

Compliance: On compliance, many countries indicated their support  for a strong system. SOUTH AFRICA reiterated the G-77/China's  support for mandatory consequences. The GAMBIA supported linking  financial penalties to a compliance fund.

Capacity building and technology transfer: Many developing  countries urged developed countries to ensure the transfer of  environmentally-sound technologies and greater commitment and  action on capacity building. Recognizing that most technologies  exist within the private sector domain, MALAYSIA urged Annex I  Parties to facilitate technology transfer by providing a conducive  environment for the private sector to perform this role.

Adverse effects: A number of countries highlighted the need to  give adequate attention to the concerns of the LDCs relating to  the adverse effects of climate change. BHUTAN, NEPAL and PERU drew  attention to the significant effects of climate change on fragile  mountain ecosystems. BHUTAN urged technical and financial support  for adaptation efforts, and said immediate concerns include a lack  of meteorological and hydrological data and the necessity of early  warning systems for natural disaster management. TANZANIA noted  the increasing frequency of extreme weather events and the  significant adverse impacts of these phenomena, and called for  financial resources and other assistance.

On the impacts of response measures to climate change, SOUTH  AFRICA noted its vulnerability, given the size of its coal  industry. Noting his country's reliance on fossil fuel exports,  LIBYA urged Annex I Parties to abolish subsidies and tax policies  that are discriminatory, and to avoid responses to climate change  that have harmful impacts.

Funding / GEF:  CUBA said the main barrier to agreement has been  lack of consensus on the availability of financial resources, and  said developed countries should take appropriate steps to resolve  this impediment. GUATEMALA supported the prompt establishment of  an adaptation fund.

Other issues: NEPAL supported integrating climate change actions  into sustainable development strategies. KAZAKHSTAN reiterated its  wish to become an Annex I Party. MOLDOVA sought clarification of  its status as both an economy in transition and a non-Annex I  country under the UNFCCC, in order to participate adequately in  joint activities under the UNFCCC and Protocol. Following the  completion of the formal statements, the Plenary adjourned at 2:00  pm.

# INFORMAL HIGH-LEVEL PLENARY & CONSULTATIONS

Delegates convened in the morning for an informal high-level  Plenary session to continue discussions and receive interim  reports from the facilitators of informal negotiating groups  formed around key issue 'clusters' or 'boxes.' These discussions  continued throughout the day in closed informal negotiating  groups. Participants then reconvened in an evening session of the  informal high-level Plenary to receive updated reports, before  breaking again into closed consultations.

### BOX A - CAPACITY BUILDING, TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER, ADVERSE EFFECTS  AND GUIDANCE TO THE GEF

The informal high-level Plenary held in  the morning began with a report by co-facilitator Minister  Mabudhafasi (South Africa) on progress made Tuesday on 'Box A'  issues. She reported that participants had recognized the need to  move toward concrete action, and highlighted the value of the  presence of ministers to find agreement on key political issues.  Co-facilitator Minister Auken (Denmark) said delegates were close  to reaching agreement on capacity building, with the exception of  the cross-cutting issue of funding. He stressed that there would  be no package deal if Parties did not find a solution to the  funding issue. Following a request by SAUDI ARABIA and the G-77/CHINA that the cross-cutting issue of funding be addressed in a  separate group, President Pronk said the group on 'Box A' would be  allocated more time to address this issue. He also called on  ministers to participate themselves in the negotiations in order  to avoid a repetition of last week's discussions.

These matters were then taken up in the afternoon in closed  informal consultations. In the evening informal high-level  Plenary, the co-facilitators reported on progress in informal  consultations on technology transfer.  Minister Mabudhafasi said  differences remained regarding: the name and composition of the  intergovernmental consultative group of experts; the reporting and  review activities and needs under UNFCCC Article 4.5; the  development of an information clearing-house and technology  centres network. Minister Auken said agreement on the issue of  funding would enable agreement on many of the outstanding issues,  and stressed apparent flexibility in the views on the GEF,  indicating that other possibilities for new and additional funding  were being explored by Parties. However, he said that much  remained unresolved on adverse effects, and informal contact  groups had been formed to deal with specific issues. JAPAN,  supported by CANADA, announced the tabling of a draft proposal by  the Umbrella Group on the creation of a new 'window' in GEF to  channel funding for the issues discussed in 'Box A'; the  streamlining of the GEF; and special consideration for LDCs and  SIDS. IRAN noted this proposal and said that, dependent on the  sentiment within the G-77/CHINA, it provided ground for further  movement on this issue.  ARGENTINA said that emissions reductions  should be the priority objective of the negotiations and that the  Umbrella Group's draft proposal was confusion on priorities.

### BOX B - MECHANISMS

During the morning informal high-level  Plenary, co-facilitator Minister Kawaguchi (Japan) reported on  progress made in the 'Box B' group. She highlighted the remaining  divergent positions on the issues of supplementarity, and said the  EU had expressed interest in a possible qualitative ceiling. On  fungibility and assigned amounts, she reported that India and the  US were conducting consultations. On CDM, she said the majority  opposed an indicative list of projects. She added that France,  Korea, Brazil and Norway were working on the issue of a prompt  start and that divergence remained on a possible unilateral CDM.  Consultations were also being held between the US and India on the  composition of the Executive Board, and between China, Norway and  Canada on the possible role of multilateral funding institutions.  In response to a question by the US on the allocation of the issue  of sinks under the CDM, President Pronk said he would consult with  the co-facilitators of both groups and then issue a ruling. The EU  said that although there was a majority against it, the option of  having a positive list of activities under the CDM should remain  on the table.

Discussions then continued in the afternoon during closed informal  consultations. Following this, delegates heard a further progress  report in the evening session of the informal high-level Plenary.  Reporting on the informal consultations, Ministers Sardenberg  (Brazil) and Kawaguchi noted that while there had been some  progress on eligibility and financial additionality, there had  been insufficient progress on liability, supplementarity, and the  composition of the Executive Board and its relationship with  COP/MOP. Sardenberg noted that ongoing consultations are taking  place on the issue of unilateral projects, and on the role of  multilateral institutions. Regarding the eligibility of projects,  he said the majority of Parties opposed a list. He noted some  support on the use of ODA financing in the CDM if this is  additional to current ODA levels. He noted growing agreement on  the role of small projects that may benefit from a fast track,  although technical details needed to be resolved. He said there  were diverse views on the eligibility of LULUCF projects, both on  substance as well as whether the mechanisms group was the most  appropriate forum. SAUDI ARABIA called for clarity on what is  meant by financing that is 'additional' to 'current' ODA. SAMOA  called for levying a 'share of proceeds' on all three mechanisms.  CHINA underlined that there remains disagreement on the issue of  unilateral or bilateral projects, and on the possible limited  inclusion of sinks in the CDM.

### BOX C - LULUCF

Negotiators involved in discussions on LULUCF met  in the afternoon and again in the evening for informal  consultations co-facilitated by Minister Carabias Lillo (Mexico)  and Minister Miklós (Slovakia). In the evening, the co- facilitators reported back to the informal high-level Plenary on  progress. Minister Carabias Lillo said the group in the afternoon  had explored different conditions for including Article 3.4  activities, possibly even in the first commitment period, under  controlled conditions. She explained that bilateral meetings had  been held with the aim of exploring an approach to this, but the  issue had not yet been resolved. She said the second meeting in  the evening had focused on the inclusion of LULUCF activities  under the CDM, and some agreement as well as concerns had emerged.  She noted that the group would be able to bring forward proposals  on the issues, but more time was needed.

### BOX D - COMPLIANCE, POLICIES AND MEASURES, AND ACCOUNTING,  REPORTING AND REVIEW UNDER PROTOCOL ARTICLES 5, 7 AND 8

In the  morning session of the informal high-level Plenary, participants  engaged in an initial exchange of views on these issues. POLAND,  for the CENTRAL GROUP ELEVEN, said the treatment of non-compliance  should not be based on the Parties, but on the nature of the  commitment. With the RUSSIAN FEDERATION, she called for  flexibility for countries with economies in transition. CHINA  highlighted that a strict compliance system should be based on  Protocol Articles 5, 7 and 8, and that Annex I Parties' reports  should include information on Protocol Articles 10 (existing  commitments) and 11 (financial mechanism), including in relation  to additional financial resources. He added that the different  responsibilities of Annex I and non-Annex I Parties should be  reflected in the sections on principles, mandate and consequences.  He concluded by raising the issue of the bodies' composition and  called for adherence to the principles of fairness and equitable  geographical representation. Pronk said the question of  composition was a cross-cutting issue. SWITZERLAND said the  integrity of the review process requires that the competence of  reviewers be a priority, and suggested training as a way to reach  both this objective and ensure equitable geographical  representation.  Following a question by President Pronk, he said  it was reasonable to have full representation in only one of the  two branches of the compliance committee.

ARGENTINA expressed concern over the adoption of a compliance  regime and a possible amendment of the Protocol before its entry  into force. Opposed by BRAZIL, he called on Parties not to push  for the most comprehensive and complex regime, but one that will  be 'viable.' On consequences, he said good faith should constitute  the main source of confidence in this agreement. The US said  legally-binding consequences need not be punitive and highlighted  that she supported a deduction from the following commitment  period with a 1.3% penalty rate as well as a restriction on the  transfer of units also applicable to Protocol Article 4 (joint  fulfilment) Parties. The EU argued that Article 4 is not a  mechanism and, commenting on ARGENTINA's intervention, said good  faith it not sufficient due to inclusion of market-based  mechanisms in the Protocol. He explained that legally-binding  consequences were thus justified both by concerns over the  environmental integrity of the Protocol, as well as by the  necessity to provide the private sector with the confidence needed  for the use of the mechanisms. He added that the rate of deduction  should fluctuate between 1 and 1.5% and would constitute an  incentive for the Party concerned to use the true-up period to  take advantage of the market. CANADA said legally-binding  consequences were also justified on competitiveness grounds. Pronk  concluded that good faith and economics should thus guide the  consequences to be adopted. The G-77/CHINA stressed that non- compliance affects everyone, and not only the trading partners of  Annex I Parties. She urged that this must be reflected in the  composition of the compliance committee.

AUSTRALIA and the RUSSIAN FEDERATION argued for a non-binding  regime and said their countries were more concerned about their  own compliance than that of others. Supporting AUSTRALIA, JAPAN  explained that its main trading partners were not the other Annex  I Parties but non-Annex I Asian countries. CANADA supported the  voluntary payments to a compliance fund to deal with mitigation  projects. IRAN said such a fund should also minimize the adverse  impact of response measures. AOSIS said payment in a voluntary  fund would actually provide Parties with an additional flexible  mechanism.

On policies and measures (P&Ms), the EU said the participation of  non-Annex I Parties in workshops would allow for a valuable  exchange of information. He said the emissions inventories alone  are not comprehensive enough to assess demonstrable progress in  2005, and suggested a COP-7 decision on the information needed in  this regard. The G-77/CHINA said the whole of Protocol Article 2 -  including provision for minimizing adverse effects - should be  referred to in the decision. He suggested keeping the reference to  'Annex I Parties,' as non-Annex I Parties would otherwise be  required to implement these obligations.

Delegates also met in closed informal consultations on these  issues in the afternoon, although the meeting was cut short when  protestors entered the room and disrupted negotiations. The  consultations were reconvened in the early evening prior to the  informal high-level Plenary, where participants heard a report on  progress. In the Plenary, co-facilitator Minister Bjerke (Norway)  highlighted a constructive dialogue and the need for more time,  given the interruption of its work. On demonstrable progress she  said discussions had focused on what to report and when. She added  that a smaller group had identified a possible compromise. This  option decides that consideration of demonstrable progress cannot  take place until SBSTA has considered this issue pursuant to  guidelines that may be elaborated under Article 7, given that  Articles 2 and 3.2 provide no mandate for P&Ms to be considered in  the context of demonstrable progress. She said issues of reporting  on Protocol Article 3.14 (adverse effects) and on supplementarity  were not resolved yet and that consultations on Protocol Article 4  (joint fulfillment) were ongoing. On compliance, she reported that  discussions had focused on consequences.

In the discussion that followed, SAUDI ARABIA said the composition  of the expert review teams and issues relating to Article 3.14  still needed consideration. The EU said a strong compliance regime  was a fundamental requirement and AOSIS highlighted the importance  it attaches to this issue.

### CONCLUSION OF THE MEETING

Reflecting on the reports from co- facilitators and comments from negotiators, President Pronk noted  the momentum generated. He invited delegates to continue  negotiating into the night in informal consultations, and asked  the co-facilitators to report back to him at 8:30 am on Thursday.  He said he would then convene a meeting of the informal Plenary,  and report on further progress made during the night. He said he  would submit his own proposal for a package deal should  negotiations reach a deadlock. He then closed the informal Plenary  at 11:20 pm.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

Many delegates expressed dismay at protests within the conference  center by a group of 30 or more activists Wednesday afternoon. The  protests disrupted a closed session of the high-level informal  negotiations, and culminated in an assault on senior US negotiator  Frank Loy during a press conference, leaving him covered in cream  cake. In addition, minor damage to property and several small  fires were reported within the center.

While several participants thought the protests might remind  delegates of the urgency and sense of impatience on the issues at  stake, some thought the near-violent nature of the incident and  the unruly behavior of the demonstrators might undermine broader  participation by NGOs, and only served to disrupt negotiations.

Meanwhile, the substantive discussions showed signs of movement,  as both multilateral and bilateral discussions moved up a gear.  Several observers reported a softening on the EU position on  several issues, including supplementarity and share of proceeds.  In addition, there was talk of one Umbrella Group member taking a  softer line on supplementarity, in return for flexibility on  LULUCF.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### INFORMAL HIGH-LEVEL PLENARY

Informal high-level Plenary sessions  chaired by COP-6 President Pronk are expected to reconvene in Van  Gogh Hall on Thursday morning, at a time to be announced on the TV  monitors. It is anticipated that President Pronk will report on  progress made during talks held through the night and outline his  plans for further negotiations.