---
title: "REPORT OF THE MEETINGS OF THE FCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES: 20 - 31 OCTOBER 1997"
id: enb1266e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1266e
date: 1997-10-31
abstract: "The Subsidiary Bodies of the UN Framework Convention on  Climate Change (FCCC) met from 20-31 October 1997 at the  Beethovenhalle in Bonn, Germany. The eighth session of Ad  Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate (AGBM-8), the last session  prior to the third meeting of the Conference of the Parties  (COP-3), opened on 22 October and suspended on 31 October.  The seventh sessions of the Subsidiary Body for  Implementation (SBI-7) and the Subsidiary Body for  Scientific and Technical Advice (SBSTA-7) met from 20-29  October."
---

Delegates to AGBM-8 continued their discussions on the  Chair's consolidated negotiating text for a protocol or  another legal instrument. Delegates met in Plenary and  'non-group' sessions to debate: quantified emission  limitation and reduction objectives; policies and measures;  institutions and mechanisms; and the advancement of  commitments contained in FCCC Article 4.1.

SBI-7 adopted conclusions on, inter alia, national  communications, activities implemented jointly (AIJ),  development and transfer of technology, and proposed  amendments to the FCCC. SBI also adopted draft decisions  for COP-3 on Annex I communications, review of the  financial mechanism, the Annex to the Memorandum of  Understanding with the GEF, COP-4, the financial  performance of the Convention, and arrangements for  administrative support.

SBSTA-7 produced conclusions on methodological issues and  the roster of experts. SBSTA also produced draft decisions  for COP-3 on cooperation with the Intergovernmental Panel  on Climate Change (IPCC), national communications and AIJ.

To the surprise of some observers, AGBM-8 was clearly  viewed by the leading players as little more than a dress  rehearsal for Kyoto. The long-awaited entrance of the US  emissions target proposals did not distract other players  from previously rehearsed opening bids on targets and  formulas for quantified emissions limits and reductions.  These were followed only by forays into complex sub-plots  that gave little away. In closing the meeting, the Chair of  AGBM pondered the pace of negotiating dynamics and wondered  aloud whether delegates could have arrived at the current  point in the process in half the time.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES

The first meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the  FCCC (COP-1) took place in Berlin from 28 March - 7 April  1995. In addition to reaching agreement on a number of  important issues related to the future of the Convention,  delegates reached agreement on what many believed to be the  central issue before COP-1 - adequacy of commitments. The  result was to launch an open-ended Ad Hoc Group on the  Berlin Mandate (AGBM) to begin a process toward appropriate  action for the period beyond 2000, including the  strengthening of the commitments of Annex I Parties through  the adoption of a protocol or another legal instrument.

## AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE (AGBM)

At AGBM-1, held in Geneva from 21-25 August 1995, delegates  considered several issues, including an analysis and  assessment to identify possible policies and measures for  Annex I Parties and requests for inputs to subsequent  sessions. They debated the nature, content and duration of  the analysis and assessment and its relationship to other  aspects of the process. Several developed and developing  countries stressed that analysis and assessment should be  conducted in parallel and not prior to the negotiations,  but a few developing countries insisted that more time was  needed, particularly to evaluate economic costs.

At AGBM-2, held in Geneva from 30 October - 3 November  1995, debate over the extent of analysis and assessment  continued, but delegates also heard new ideas for the  structure and form of a possible protocol. Delegates  considered: strengthening of commitments in Article 4.2 (a)  and (b) regarding policies and measures, as well as  quantified emission limitation and reduction objectives  (QELROs) within specified time frames; advancing the  implementation of Article 4.1; and possible features of a  protocol or another legal instrument.

At AGBM-3, held in Geneva from 5-8 March 1996, delegates  heard a number of specific proposals on new commitments for  Annex I Parties, including a two-phase CO2 emissions  reduction target proposed by Germany. They also discussed  how Annex I countries might distribute or share new  commitments, and whether those should take the form of an  amendment or protocol. Delegates agreed to compile  proposals for new commitments for consideration at AGBM-4,  and to hold informal roundtable discussions on policies and  measures as well as on QELROs.

AGBM-4, held from 8-19 July 1996 in Geneva, completed its  in-depth analyses of the likely elements of a protocol or  another legal instrument, and appeared ready to move  forward to the preparation of a negotiating text at its  next session. Most of the discussions dealt with approaches  to policies and measures, QELROs, and an assessment of the  likely impact of new commitments for Annex I Parties on  developing countries.

The Second Conference of the Parties (COP-2) met in Geneva  from 8-19 July 1996 and produced some important political  statements. The COP concluded by noting the 'Geneva  Declaration,' which endorses the IPCC conclusions and calls  for legally binding objectives and significant reductions  in greenhouse gas emissions. COP-2 also saw a significant  shift in position by the US, which for the first time  supported a legally binding agreement to fulfill the Berlin  Mandate. However, even as Parties prepared to strengthen  commitments, COP-2 highlighted the sharpest differences  between them.

AGBM-5, which met in Geneva from 9-18 December 1996,  considered proposals from 14 Parties or groups of Parties  regarding strengthening of commitments, advancing the  implementation of Article 4.1, and possible elements of a  protocol or another legal instrument. Delegates adopted  conclusions requesting the Secretariat to produce a  'framework compilation' of proposals for further  consideration.

AGBM-6 met from 3-7 March 1997 in Bonn. Delegates met in  'non-groups' to exchange views and 'streamlined' the  framework compilation text by merging or eliminating some  overlapping provisions within the myriad of proposals. This  brought the process one step, albeit a small one, closer to  fulfilling its mandate. Much of the discussion centered on  a proposal from the EU for a 15% cut in a 'basket' of  greenhouse gases by the year 2010 compared to 1990 levels.  Nonetheless, other proposals emerged in the eleventh hour,  signaling that AGBM-6, despite the hopes of many observers,  had yet to foster much progress on several fundamental  points.

AGBM-7 met from 28 July - 7 August 1997 in Bonn. A total of  145 Parties and Observer States participated in the  session, as well as 691 representatives from NGOs and the  media. AGBM-7 further streamlined the negotiating text for  a protocol or another legal instrument. In the absence of  initial formal proposals for emissions reduction targets by  the US and Japan, there was a widespread sense that most of  the progress achieved at this session was limited to a  reduction in the number of proposals.

## SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION (SBI)

The SBI was established by the COP to assist in the review  and assessment of the implementation of the Convention and  in the preparation and implementation of the COP's  decisions. SBI-1 took place from 31 August - 1 September  1995 in Geneva. The SBI addressed a number of issues and  recommended that the COP adopt the draft Memorandum of  Understanding with the GEF as the financial mechanism,  proposing a draft decision on this item to be adopted by  COP-2.

At SBI-2, held in Geneva from 27 February - 4 March 1996,  delegates considered in-depth reviews of national  communications, and matters related to the financial  mechanism. While delegates welcomed the GEF Council's  adoption of its operational strategy, many noted the need  to expedite the process of providing 'full agreed costs'  for non-Annex I communications or risk serious delay.

At SBI-3, held from 9-16 July 1996 in Geneva, differences  were resolved in closed sessions, and were considered for  adoption by the open SBI session only after consensus had  been reached on: technology transfer; the operating budget  of the Secretariat; the Annex to the Memorandum of  Understanding (MOU) between the GEF Council and the COP;  and national communications from non-Annex I Parties.

SBI-4 met from 9-18 December 1996 in Geneva. Delegates  finalized agreement on the Annex to the Memorandum of  Understanding (MOU) between the Conference of the Parties  (COP) and the GEF Council.

Discussions at SBI-5, which met in Bonn from 25-28 February  1997, were complex and often lengthy, but delegates agreed  on the timetable and process for review of the programme  budget and agreed on the FCCC input to the UN General  Assembly Special Session (UNGASS). SBI-5 could not agree on  the review of the financial mechanism or the activities of  the GEF.

SBI-6 met from 28 July - 7 August 1997 in Bonn. Delegates  to SBI-7 reached agreement on arrangements for  intergovernmental meetings and the programme budget, but  noted that further discussions on the financial mechanisms  and national communications.

## SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL ADVICE (SBSTA)

SBSTA was established by COP-1 to link: scientific,  technical and technological assessments; information  provided by competent international bodies; and the policy- oriented needs of the COP. At SBSTA-1, held in Geneva from  28-30 August 1995, delegates confronted technically and  politically complex issues including: scientific  assessments, national communications and AIJ under the  pilot phase. Among the more contentious issues were  definition of SBSTA's relationship with the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the terms  of reference and composition of the technical advisory  panels on technologies and methodologies (TAPs) and the  elaboration of guidelines for national communications from  non-Annex I Parties.

SBSTA-2, held in Geneva from 27 February-4 March 1996,  considered the IPCC's Second Assessment Report (SAR) and  the Technical Advisory Panels (TAPs) and could not yet  agree on how to absorb or respond to scientific predictions  of climate change. Although initial discussions gave the  impression that SBSTA-2 would greet the IPCC's predictions  with less resistance than in previous FCCC negotiations,  oil producers and other developing countries ultimately  blocked consensus on specific conclusions about the SAR.  Weekend negotiations resulted in a fragile agreement on  language defining the divergence of opinion.

At SBSTA-3, held from 9-16 July 1996, delegates discussed  the SAR and sent an unfinished draft decision with brackets  to the COP for resolution. Decisions were adopted in  conjunction with the SBI on Communications from Annex I  Parties and on Communications from non-Annex I Parties.  Progress was made on a roster of experts and technical  panels.

SBSTA-4 met from 9-18 December 1996 in Geneva. Discussions  were complex and often difficult, but delegates confirmed  future cooperation with the IPCC and agreed to apply the  revised IPCC 1996 guidelines for national greenhouse gas  (GHG) inventories. Delegates also agreed to further work on  revisions to the Uniform Reporting Format and  methodological issues pertaining to AIJ.

At SBSTA-5, which met in Bonn from 25-28 February 1997,  delegates considered a number of issues and reached  agreement on the Uniform Reporting Format, requested a work  plan for an in-depth review of second national  communications, and requested a number of reports on  technology transfer.

SBSTA-6 met from 28 - 7 July 1997, in Bonn. Discussions  centered on methodological issues, such as methods for  inventories and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. A joint  SBSTA/SBI contact group produced a decision for adoption at  COP-3 on the division of labor between the two groups.

# REPORT OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES

Three of the subsidiary bodies to the Framework Convention  on Climate Change met during the period 20-31 October 1997.  Delegates to SBSTA-7 and SBI-7 met from 20-28 October.  SBSTA-7 held four Plenary meetings, while SBI-7 held five.  A number of informal contact groups also met. Delegates to  AGBM-8 met from 22-31 October in Plenary and 'non-group'  sessions to debate: quantified emission limitation and  reduction objectives (QELROs); policies and measures  (P&Ms); institutions and mechanisms (I&Ms); and the  advancement of commitments contained in FCCC Article 4.1.  In closing Plenary, delegates: agreed that AGBM-8 was not  'adjourned' but merely 'suspended' until 30 November, when  AGBM-8 will hold a special session to complete discussions  on outstanding issues.

## AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE

### OPENING PLENARY

On 22 October, AGBM Chair Raúl Estrada-Oyuela (Argentina)  opened the eighth session of the AGBM and reminded  delegates that only ten days remained for the AGBM to  complete its work. He said a 'good dose' of willingness to  enter into commitments is required, but noted he was not  convinced that it exists in all sectors. He noted that this  last session should not repeat well known positions, but  make progress in the negotiations.

FCCC Executive Secretary Michael Zammit-Cutajar stated that  equity should remain central to the Kyoto result. Climate  change adds a new factor to inequality and social stress in  the world, weighing most heavily on the poor and vulnerable  that are least able to adapt. He said leadership does not  mean sacrifice, but making the effort to change direction  and take advantage of new opportunities.

TANZANIA, on behalf of the G-77/CHINA, said Parties stood  at a defining moment and members of his group were ready to  assume their differentiated responsibilities, in particular  the existing commitments in FCCC Article 4.1. He noted that  there are to be no new commitments for non-Annex I  countries and recalled his group's concerns about adoption  of policies and measures that take into account impacts on  developing countries. He identified unfulfilled commitments  on financial assistance as the stumbling blocks to  advancement of developing country commitments. He tabled  the G-77/CHINA position on QELROs, which proposes:•time frames of 2005, 2010 and 2020; •periodic review by the COP; •return to 1990 emission levels by 2000; •reductions in CO2, CH4 and N20 by at least 7.5% of  1990 levels by 2005, by 15% by 2010, and by an additional  20% by 2020, thus leading to a total reduction of 35%; •efforts to phase-out other GHGs including HFCs, PFCs  and SF6; •achievement of QELROs by domestic measures; •minimizing adverse impacts on developing country  Parties and a Compensation Fund; and •a Clean Development Fund to assist developing country  Parties, funded by contributions from Annex I Parties found  in non-compliance with their QELROs.

JAPAN called on all Parties to exercise flexibility in  their QELROs proposals and elaborated on the Japanese  proposal intended to accommodate divergent views. The  proposal is for a 5% base reduction rate for deciding a  target for each Annex I country, with target periods of  2008 and 2012. It covers CO2, CH4 and N20. Individual  country targets are differentiated by emissions per GDP,  emissions per capita and population growth. It also  provides for emissions trading and joint implementation. On  developing countries, the proposal provides for enhanced  efforts through the elaboration of existing commitments and  urges more advanced developing countries to assume  voluntary commitments. A new process to further discuss  commitments by all Parties is proposed for after Kyoto.

LUXEMBOURG, on behalf of the EU, indicated concerns about  references in the negotiating text to policies and measures  and to advancing the implementation of Article 4.1 and  associated financial provisions. He noted that the European  Commission had produced a document to demonstrate the  feasibility of the EU reduction targets of at least 7.5%  and 15% below 1990 levels by 2005 and 2010 respectively.

The UK, also on behalf of the EU, outlined an explanation  of the EU's joint or 'bubble' approach to emissions  obligations, and offered text for insertion into the  Chair's negotiating draft. He explained that, for example,  the EU-proposed target of 15% reductions would be met  jointly, with member States opting for joint  implementation. These States would inform the Secretariat  of the terms of the agreement for joint implementation five  years before the expiry of the target period, with each  declaring its share of the overall contribution to  reductions. There would also be provisions for amending or  rescinding a burden-sharing agreement and for dealing with  any failure to meet the total target.

SAMOA, on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States  (AOSIS), supported the G-77/China statement and said all  proposals remain on the table, including that of AOSIS. He  expressed deep disappointment with Japan's proposals, whose  flexibility would render the small effort non-legally  binding. He supported the draft article that would permit  Parties to assume commitments voluntarily.

ZIMBABWE, on behalf of the African Group, emphasized per  capita emissions as a basis of attaining equity. She called  a 15% target by 2010 a minimum and demanded leadership from  Annex I Parties, especially Japan and the US. She said a  penalty clause for failure to meet targets is a necessary  incentive.

The US was extremely disappointed that the Chair's text  omitted its proposal that all Parties adopt quantified GHG  emissions obligations by 2005. Kyoto should be part of a  rolling series of negotiations and will be unacceptable if  it fails to initiate a process that recognizes the global  nature of the problem.

The RUSSIAN FEDERATION stressed maintaining the balance of  interests, including those of countries with economies in  transition. ICELAND pointed to differentiated emission  objectives and the need to take account of differences in  starting points, economies and resource bases.

The US introduced its position in a QELROs non-group  session on 23 October, following an announcement by  President Clinton the previous evening. The position  contained three elements. The US will commit to a binding  target of returning emissions to 1990 levels in a budget  period between 2008 and 2012, to reducing net emissions of  all GHGs below 1990 levels in the five-year period  thereafter (between 2013 and 2018), and working for further  reductions in the years beyond that. It also called for a  series of flexible market mechanisms, including emissions  trading and joint implementation. The US will not assume  binding obligations unless key developing countries  meaningfully participate. He said this position reflects  the fact that if the entire industrialized world reduces  emissions, but developing countries continue to grow at  their current pace, GHG concentrations will continue to  climb.

The US also recalled that President Clinton announced a  domestic program, including a US$5 billion series of tax  incentives and research investments to encourage energy  efficiency and the use of cleaner energy. He also proposed  the creation of a domestic market-based system for reducing  emissions that will tie national efforts into a global  emissions market.

Chair Estrada introduced a consolidated negotiating text  (FCCC/AGBM/1997/7) that he hoped would serve as a basis for  the completion of a protocol. He noted that very few  brackets appeared in the text, mainly on single-year  targets or budget periods, flat rates, emissions credits  and two alternatives on the governing body of the Protocol.  He said Annexes I and II had been used as categories for  countries.

The Business and Industry NGOs said that business and  industry play a unique role in the implementation of FCCC.  He said many business and industry members supported a  variety of voluntary national and international initiatives  for limiting GHG emissions.

The US and European Business Councils for a Sustainable  Energy Future said that the benefits of sustainable energy  innovation are not only relevant to climate protection but  also to employment, environmental and social policies,  geopolitical stability and the national interest of fuel  importing countries.

The Climate Action Network said that Japan, and possibly  the US, were making proposals for targets and timetables  that were ten-year extensions of the target that was agreed  upon at COP-2. She indicated that Japan's proposal only  succeeds in lowering the overall level of negotiations by  shifting the balance in favor of the weakest positions. The  International Council for Local Environmental Initiatives  (ICLEI) reported on examples of four successful local  action plans to reduce GHG emissions.

### 'STOCK-TAKING' PLENARY

On 27 October, delegates met in Plenary to 'take stock' of  their progress and hear reports from the Chairs of the non- groups. Some delegations provided additional comments. The  RUSSIAN FEDERATION suggested that Parties find agreement on  the quantitative parameters of the protocol, expanding the  'bubble' concept to all Annex I Parties in line with the  principle of common but differentiated responsibilities.  The commitments of individual Parties in the bubble could  be based on the proposed targets put forward by those  Parties. By 2010, an annual average reduction of some 3%  could be achieved. Commitments should be achieved in  absolute numbers rather than in percentage terms. Any  attempt to apply a single criterion could give rise to a  desire by some Parties to be taken out of Annex I. The UK,  commenting on the Russian proposal, said that the EU  proposal for a 15% reduction in emissions was not  unilateral.

SAMOA, on behalf of AOSIS, said that US President Clinton's  announcement on targets did not provide the leadership  expected from the world's wealthiest nation. The US  commitment was not a new commitment but an attempt to delay  the achievement of a goal that COP-1 had decided was  inadequate. He urged President Clinton not to defer  responsibility for the duration of three presidential  terms.

The EU welcomed the fact that the US and Japan shared its  concerns and recognized the potential to reduce GHGs  through cost-effective domestic action, but added that this  was not properly reflected in the proposed targets. The US  figures were lower than Japan's already insufficient  targets. Serious negotiations would be needed to produce  the outcome the world needs.

The US described its proposal as aggressive and pointed out  that some other proposals do not check the growth of trace  gases nor protect forests and soil sinks. The proposal was  fully compatible with long-term concentration targets that  have been put forward by other Parties. Avoiding such  concentrations would depend more on developing countries'  responses. No other Party was ready to implement its  domestic programme so expeditiously. Others had proposed  unrealistic targets that fail to address HFCs, PFCs and  SF6. The US had also provided the most detailed proposals  for compliance. Beginning the process of agreeing on  developing country commitments would help them avoid an  'emissions-intensive' path of development.

NON-GROUP ON QELROs The AGBM Chair's text contained nine articles related to  QELROs, two annexes and an attachment. In light of the  amount of material to be covered, as well as the  contentious nature of the issues, the non-group on QELROs  was divided into two sub-groups: one chaired by Luiz Gylvan  Meira Filho (Brazil) and the other by Amb. Bo Kjellén  (Sweden).

The most heavily bracketed article in the AGBM Chair's text  was on commitments (Article 3). The article contained 16  paragraphs, of which nine were completely bracketed. The  initial paragraph contained brackets referring to whether  [Each of] the Parties would reduce [or  limit][its/their][net][aggregate] emissions of GHGs listed  in an annex as a basket from [1990 levels] or an [average  annual level] for a period to be determined, by [5/15/20]  per cent [by 2010] or [over a period] to be determined.

The second paragraph stated that commitments for Annex I  Parties would be inscribed in an attachment listing the  name of the Party, its emission commitments and the base  [year/period]. The third paragraph identified criteria  (listed in an annex) to establish commitments for: Annex I  countries that were not Parties to the Convention by the  date of adoption of the Protocol; countries that had become  Annex I Parties subsequent to the adoption of the Protocol;  and non-Annex I Parties that had notified their desire to  be included in Annex I. Other bracketed paragraphs within  Article 3 referred to: budget periods; allocation of  budgets; procedures to set budgets; commitments based on  net or average annual emissions; emissions credits; and  modalities for the accounting of emission budgets.  Paragraphs without brackets dealt with: QELROs for Annex I  Parties undergoing the process of transition to a market  economy; QELROs for Parties that undertake voluntary  commitments; 'demonstrable progress' by Annex I Parties by  the year 2005 toward their commitments; and regular review  of listed GHGs by the Meeting of the Parties (MOP).

Other articles in the text related to QELROs referred to  national systems for the accurate estimation of GHG  emissions by sources and removals by sinks (Article 4);  emissions trading (Article 5); joint implementation  (Article 6); emissions inventories (Article 7); review of  national communications (Article 8); procedures and  mechanisms to determine and address cases of non-compliance  (Article 9); voluntary commitments by non-Annex I Parties  (Article 10); and periodic review of the adequacy of  commitments (Article 11). The first annex (Annex A) listed  policies and measures (P&Ms), the second (Annex B), GHGs  and source and sink categories, and the third (Annex C),  procedures for the adoption of commitments.

On 30 October, after extensive discussion in non-group  meetings and contact groups, a revised text was considered  by the AGBM in Plenary. When introducing the text, the  QELROs-1 non-group Chair noted that key issues were  bracketed and hoped they would be resolved in Kyoto. He  said there had been agreement on an article addressing  supplementary information for annual inventories of GHGs  and national communications by Annex I Parties (Article 7).  He pointed out that definition of values and dates under  Article 3 was pending, as well as consideration of removals  by sinks under QELROs. He hoped the AGBM would address  issues on sinks, considering time constraints at Kyoto. A  contact group was established to consider the issue further  and discuss proposals by New Zealand, Brazil and others. He  also called attention to a definition of 'net' to be  included in the Protocol.

QELROs-2 Chair Bo Kjellén reported that further  consultations were taking place on QELROs for Annex I  Parties with economies in transition, articles on emissions  trading (Article 5) and joint implementation (Article 6)  were completely bracketed, an article on national  communications (Article 8) was agreed to, except for  references to an article on voluntary commitments (Article  10) and to the MOP, and that no agreement had been reached  on voluntary commitments.

On 31 October, a revised version of the text was produced  for consideration at the closing AGBM session  (FCCC/AGBM/1997/CRP.3). The AGBM Chair called attention to  three alternatives under Article 3 on QELROs commitments  and expressed his hope that they adequately reflected the  discussions that had taken place. The UK suggested merging  two bracketed alternatives on the establishment of  commitments either by using a process set out in Annex C,  or by determining uniform commitments for all Annex I  Parties. AUSTRALIA said the alternatives should remain  separate. A number of delegations commented on the text.

On the three alternatives under Article 3, the AGBM Chair  said that making everyone happy was difficult and suggested  that they be referred to COP-3 as such. He indicated that  disagreement on these issues was duly reflected in the  text.

The document referred by the AGBM for consideration at COP- 3 contains 10 articles, two annexes and an attachment. Five  of the articles, the annexes and the attachment are  completely bracketed. A footnote states that the  consolidated negotiating text proposed by the AGBM Chair  (FCCC/AGBM/1997/CRP.3) at the outset of AGBM-8, remains  before the group.

The first paragraph on QELROs commitments for Annex I  Parties contains three alternatives. Under the first  alternative, Parties shall individually or jointly ensure  that their net aggregate anthropogenic CO2 equivalent  emissions of GHGs listed in an annex do not exceed their  commitments, expressed in terms of emissions budgets  inscribed in an attachment. The second alternative  determines that each Annex I Party shall ensure that its  net aggregate anthropogenic CO2 equivalent emissions of  GHGs listed in an annex do not exceed its commitments,  expressed in terms of emissions budgets inscribed in an  attachment. The third alternative establishes that each  Annex I Party shall achieve QELROs within time frames, such  as 2005, 2010 and 2020 for its anthropogenic emissions by  sources and removals by sinks of CO2 and other GHGs not  controlled by the Montreal Protocol.

The second paragraph includes two alternatives for the  establishment of Annex I Party commitments: through a  process set out in an annex, or through uniform  commitments. Two paragraphs on the establishment and  implementation of QELROs commitments for Annex I Parties  undergoing the process of transition to a market economy  are not bracketed. All of the subsequent paragraphs under  the article are bracketed and, inter alia, refer to:•'demonstrable progress' by Annex I Parties  in the achievement of their commitments by 2005; •QELROs for countries that undertake  voluntary commitments; •baselines for the determination of budget  periods; •first and second emission budgets; •emissions credits and emissions trading; •calculation of emissions budgets; •procedures to review the list of GHGs; •efforts to reduce and limit emissions of  GHGs; •the establishment of a fund to compensate  developing country Parties that may suffer social,  environmental and/or economic loss as a result of actions  to meet QELROs; and •a clean development fund to assist  developing country Parties to achieve sustainable  development and contribute to FCCC objectives.

A bracketed Article 3(bis) on QELROs commitments states  that any Annex I Parties that have agreed to fulfill their  QELROs obligations jointly, shall be deemed to have met  those obligations provided that their total combined level  of emissions reductions meets the levels as set out in an  attachment. Paragraphs under the article address  operational aspects of joint fulfillment of obligations.  Article 4, on national systems for the estimation of  anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinks of  all GHGs, contains brackets around a paragraph on the use  of global warming potentials (GWP) to calculate the CO2  equivalence of anthropogenic emissions by sources and  removals by sinks of GHGs, specific references to budget  periods, and a reference to the role of the MOP in  reviewing methodologies.

A bracketed Article 5 (emissions trading) to meet QELROs  commitments, inter alia, includes criteria for trading and  determines that the MOP shall decide upon modalities, rules  and guidelines. A footnote stating that the G-77/CHINA has  requested the deletion of this article was included.  Bracketed Article 6 on joint implementation contains  conditions and guidelines for JI projects, including prior  acceptance, approval or endorsement by the participating  Parties and the aim of bringing about real, measurable and  long-term environmental benefits related to the mitigation  of climate change. There is a footnote saying that the G-77/CHINA has requested a deletion of this article, while  other Parties, including the EU and the US have indicated  that they require further consultations.

Article 7, which is not bracketed, refers to inclusion of  supplementary information in Annex I Parties' annual  inventories of emissions by sources and removals by sinks  of GHGs, with the aim of ensuring compliance with QELROs  commitments.

Article 8 on national communications and inventories,  remains unbracketed, but includes a footnote indicating  that the paragraphs on the role of the SBI and the MOP in  this regard is contingent upon decisions on institutions  and mechanisms in other parts of the protocol. Another  bracketed article (Article 10) refers to voluntary  commitments by non-Annex I Parties. A footnote indicates  that the G-77/CHINA does not wish to include this article  in the Protocol. Article 11, on the periodic review of the  implementation of the Protocol with a view to evaluating  its impact and effectiveness, remains without brackets,  except for a reference to Article 3. Annex B is bracketed,  as well as Annex C. The attachment listing the names of  Parties, their emissions commitments and base year periods  is also bracketed.

### NON-GROUP ON POLICIES AND MEASURES

In the original consolidated negotiating text by the AGBM  Chair, Article 2 indicated that each Annex I Party or  Parties acting under voluntary commitments (Article 10),  shall:•adopt and implement P&Ms to assist in the fulfillment  of its QELROs; •minimize adverse effects on other Parties,  particularly developing countries; •aim to implement P&Ms in priority areas identified in  an annex; •cooperate to enhance the individual and combined  effectiveness of their P&Ms in accordance with the  Convention; and •cooperate to develop common performance indicators  with the aim of improving comparability and transparency of  reporting and sharing of information.

It also stated that the Meeting of the Parties (MOP) would,  as soon as practicable, make recommendations on the  definition of performance indicators.

On 22 October, the non-group, chaired by Bakary Kante  (Senegal), discussed proposed amendments put forth by two  groups of countries. One group proposed deleting a  reference to Article 10. The other group, inter alia,  proposed that a process be instituted to develop guidelines  for modalities of coordination and cooperation for the  implementation of P&Ms. There was a discussion on whether  the implementation of P&Ms should 'take into account,'  'mitigate' or 'avoid' adverse effects, as well as on the  types of effects and who is affected. On 24 and 28 October,  the non-group further considered proposals from two groups  of countries. Some delegates reported little movement.

On 30 October in Plenary, the Chair of the non-group  introduced a paper reflecting the group's work. He said the  group reached consensus on one of five sub-paragraphs in  the AGBM Chair's draft text. On the chapeau, he noted that  a reference to a specific article had been bracketed  pending outcomes on voluntary commitments. He said the  group had agreed on the first part of a sub-paragraph on  the implementation and adoption of P&Ms by Annex I Parties  to achieve QELROs, but had disagreed on a part listing P&Ms  under an annex. No agreement was reached on language  indicating that Annex I Parties shall coordinate the  implementation of P&Ms listed under an annex. Two proposed  versions of Annex A, which listed P&Ms, were attached to  the document.

The US, supported by CANADA, JAPAN AND AUSTRALIA, proposed  bracketing text that 'the COP/MOP shall assess the  application of P&Ms.' The EU proposed merging two bracketed  alternatives referring to P&Ms listed in Annex A. CANADA,  the US and JAPAN said that proposals on annexes had not  been negotiated. JAPAN favored an alternative stating that  P&Ms shall be adopted in accordance with national  circumstances. The EU, the G-77/CHINA and AUSTRALIA agreed  that P&Ms should not be listed in an annex but should be  incorporated into the Protocol. The US expressed its  preference for listing P&Ms under an annex.

The Chair asked for further comments on retention of the  COP/MOP assessment sentence, and delegates repeated their  positions. The Chair ruled that there was consensus to  retain the text, except for three countries. CHINA asked if  the text would be communicated to Kyoto with brackets. The  Chair said nothing is agreed until everything is. The US  raised a point of order that there was no consensus. The  Chair said delegates could challenge his decision under the  rules of procedure. The US, CANADA and VENEZUELA said there  could not be consensus if delegations objected. VENEZUELA  challenged the ruling. The Chair noted that a two-thirds  vote was required to overturn the ruling and called for a  vote.

EGYPT said delegations were referring to unanimity. The  Chair's ruling on consensus reflected his sense of the  negotiations. The Chair said it was necessary to  distinguish between unanimity and consensus. IRAN and  KUWAIT requested a legal opinion. The US proposed that the  Chair produce a text of his conclusions. He responded that  he feared voting on every paragraph and bracket. VENEZUELA  accepted that the Chair had taken the sense of the meeting.  The Chair said his ruling meant this. MAURITANIA said every  decision should be left to Kyoto. SAUDI ARABIA said  adoptions at this stage were meaningless as all amendments  will be forwarded to Kyoto. The Chair said with the  challenge withdrawn there would be no vote. He said it was  clear that a group of countries was trying to stop the  Convention and the protocol, but he would not be 'held  hostage' to countries methodically trying to stop progress.

The non-group Chair noted two alternatives for a paragraph  on adverse effects of P&Ms. The US proposed a reformulation  calling for assessment of the overall effect on climate  change and Parties' social, environmental and economic  situations. The G-77/CHINA requested a footnote linking the  issue to a clean development fund.

On cooperation between Parties to enhance effectiveness,  the EU agreed to take up the question of voluntary  application of P&Ms in discussions on voluntary  commitments, and discuss voluntary accession by non-Annex I  countries on a basis easier than quantitative targets.

On 31 October, in closing Plenary, a new version of the  text was considered (FCCC/AGBM/1997/CRP.2). The US,  supported by CANADA, said he was surprised to see that the  alternatives on annexes listing P&Ms had been introduced  'wholesale' into the text, and indicated that the annexes  in general had not been negotiated. The AGBM Chair noted  that two groups of countries agreed that the content of the  annexes on P&Ms should appear in the body of the text. The  EU said proposals on annexes had been on the table for a  long time and reiterated that their content should be  incorporated into the text. The US proposed a footnote  clarifying that the annexes had not been negotiated and  stating that some delegations did not agree to their  inclusion in the body of the text. The AGBM Chair said that  this would give way to the use of footnotes for every issue  and noted that the P&Ms lists were completely bracketed.

Taking into account these comments, delegates accepted the  new version of Article 2, which contains two paragraphs.  The chapeau and first paragraph state that each of the  Parties included in Annex I [or acting under Article 10]  shall adopt and implement P&Ms in achieving its commitments  regarding QELROs, to achieve sustainable development.

There are two bracketed alternatives listing P&Ms. The  first indicates that P&Ms shall be adopted according to  national circumstances and includes:•enhancement of energy efficiency in all sectors; •protection and enhancement of sinks and reservoirs; •promotion, development and increased use of renewable  forms of energy; •phasing out of market imperfections that run counter  to FCCC objectives; and •providing a balance between P&Ms aimed at reducing  emissions of GHGs in emitting sectors and those aimed at  reducing consumption of their products.

The second alternative includes a larger list of P&Ms and  does not make a reference to national circumstances. In  addition to the P&Ms under the previous alternative, it  lists, inter alia, the following:•develop measures to limit and/or reduce emissions of  GHGs in the transport sectors; •limit or reduce emissions from aviation and marine  bunker fuels and work towards introducing fuel aviation  taxation; •integrate climate change considerations into  agricultural practices; and •research, develop and promote transfer of innovative  climate-friendly technologies and reduce emissions of HFCs,  PFCs and SF6.

There is unbracketed language stating that the Meeting of  the Parties shall assess the application of P&Ms.

There are two bracketed options on the adverse effects of  implementing P&Ms. The first one states that listed P&Ms  shall be implemented 'in such a way as to avoid' the  adverse effects of climate change. P&Ms should also avoid  adverse effects upon: international trade and social,  environmental and economic impacts on other Parties,  especially developing country Parties. There is a footnote  indicating that 'this matter is linked with the issue of a  compensation fund and a clean development fund'. This  option provides for the COP to take further action, as  appropriate, to 'promote the implementation of the  provisions' of the subparagraph.

The second option speaks of implementing P&Ms 'taking into  account' the adverse effects of climate change and/or the  impacts on developing countries, especially the ones  identified by the FCCC as the most vulnerable to climate  change. It provides for the MOP to take actions, as  appropriate, 'with respect to this paragraph.' There is text on the cooperation with other Parties to  enhance individual and combined effectiveness of P&Ms,  which requests Parties to share experience and exchange  information on P&Ms, including developing ways of improving  their comparability, transparency and effectiveness. It  determines that the MOP shall consider ways to facilitate  such cooperation.

There is a bracketed paragraph to the effect that Parties  included in Annex I [or acting under Article 10] shall  coordinate the implementation of P&Ms and the development  of methodologies to assess their effectiveness. It also  states that the MOP shall consider ways and means to  facilitate such coordination, including by instituting a  process to develop recommendations to Parties in the form  of guidelines, taking into account national circumstances  and relevant work by other bodies. It was decided that this  new version of the text would be referred to COP-3 for  further consideration and decision.

### NON-GROUP ON INSTITUTIONS AND MECHANISMS

The non-group on institutions and mechanisms (I&Ms),  chaired by Takao Shibata (Japan), discussed the preamble  and 13 articles in the AGBM Chair's draft text. The text  contained various proposals on: definitions; whether to  establish a Meeting of the Parties (MOP) or utilize the  Convention COP; the secretariat; subsidiary bodies; a  multilateral consultative process (MCP); amendments,  procedures for annexes and attachments; voting; regional  economic integration organizations as Parties;  reservations; and entry into force, withdrawal, and  languages.

On 23 October, delegates in the non-group agreed that there  was no need to recapitulate elements from the FCCC in the  preamble. On the article listing definitions (Article 1),  delegates agreed to delete text on the role of the Meeting  of the Parties. A regional group introduced a new draft  article based on the IPCC's scientific findings. Of the two  proposals contained in the negotiating text on the body to  oversee the Protocol, the alternative that describes the  Conference of the Parties as the supreme body of the  Protocol attracted the most support. There was general  support for institutional economy through which the  existing institutions serve the purposes of the protocol.

On 27 October, the non-group discussed the final articles  of the draft negotiating text, including those on  ratification, regional economic integration organizations,  entry into force and withdrawal. A number of substantive  discussions were postponed until decisions determining the  overall shape of the protocol have been taken. On  provisions for regional economic integration organizations,  most participants felt that the issue should be deferred  since it is linked to the AGBM's acceptance of the 'bubble'  concept for meeting commitments. Negotiators concluded that  a decision on whether to link entry into force to the  number of ratifications alone or to a combination of  ratifications and CO2 emissions covered should also be  postponed.

On 29 October, the group discussed legal aspects of the  'bubble' concept for a shared emissions target for a group  of countries. The EU presented its text, noting that the  shared target was a matter of compliance. Other delegations  disagreed with the position.

On Article 14, which defines the role of the COP and the  Meeting of Parties (MOP), a group of countries proposed a  reference to an FCCC Article 7 provision that the COP can  review 'any related instrument.' It also requested  restoration of bracketed text requiring protocol Parties to  provide additional funding in an article on Secretariat  services to a protocol. There was general agreement that an  article on subsidiary bodies should be aligned with the  text on the COP and the MOP.

A contact group presented language that the MOP shall  'approve appropriate and effective' non-compliance  procedures and mechanisms, but a number of delegations  objected. A group of countries said the non-compliance text  was linked to the decision on establishing a clean  development fund.

In a paragraph on amendments to a protocol, a delegation  proposed a footnote that amendments could only apply in  light of FCCC Articles 4.2 (a), (b) and (d), and another  delegation suggested that approval of amendments should be  by double two-thirds majority. Delegates discussed possible  meanings of annexes, but a group of countries objected to  using annexes and to attachments in a separate article on  adding non-Annex I Parties to the protocol.

On 31 October, in the closing Plenary, CANADA said  delegates should consider an 'early warning system' in the  article on non-compliance. CANADA and AUSTRALIA emphasized  that a footnote regarding regional economic integration  organizations means that the EU 'bubble' has not yet been  accepted. CANADA supported linking entry into force to both  ratifications and emissions, but he said the emissions  threshold should be 5 Gigatonnes rather than 3 as in the  text. The Chair noted that the total in 1990 was 6.5  Gigatonnes.

AUSTRALIA reminded delegates that it had proposed text on  the relationship of the protocol to other agreements. Non- group Chair Shibata said he had the proposal, and others  not appearing in the text, 'in his pocket' for further  discussion.

The revised document on I&Ms (FCCC/AGBM/1997/CRP.4),  accepted in closing Plenary, contains the preamble and 14  articles. The preamble notes the FCCC objective, recalls  Convention provisions, is guided by its Article 3 and  refers to the Berlin Mandate.

Article 14, on the supreme body for the protocol, states  that the Convention COP would serve as the MOP. It permits  Convention Parties not party to the protocol to be  observers and states that protocol decisions would be made  by its Parties only. Convention Bureau members not party to  the protocol would be substituted by a protocol member. The  MOP functions would include:•periodically examining obligations; •exchange of information on measures adopted and their  effects; •facilitating coordination of measures by two or more  requesting Parties; •promoting and guiding development of methodologies for  inventories and evaluation of measures; •assessing implementation, in particular environmental,  economic and social effects as well as cumulative impacts,  and progress toward the Convention objectives; and •seeking to mobilize additional funding of the  financial mechanism.

It also sets procedures for scheduling meetings and  participation of observers.

Article 15, on a Secretariat, notes that the FCCC  Secretariat shall serve the protocol. A bracketed paragraph  requires that distinct costs of Secretariat services to the  protocol be met by protocol Parties. The article on  subsidiary bodies (Article 16) states that the SBI and  SBSTA will also serve the same functions for a protocol and  sets procedures for observers and Bureau member  substitution similar to the MOP article. Protocol Parties  would modify the Convention's MCP from FCCC Article 13 as  necessary in the MCP article.

Article 17bis on compliance states that the MOP shall set  procedures to determine and address non-compliance cases  and develop an indicative list of consequences. It contains  a footnote to a sentence that mentions but does not specify  binding penalties. The footnote acknowledges the G-77/CHINA  proposal to link the article to a clean development fund.

The article on amendments (Article 18) footnotes a proposal  that the amendments would apply in light of the adequacy of  FCCC Articles 4.2(a), (b) and (d). A proposal for approval  by three-fourths majority if consensus cannot be reached  has a footnote referencing an alternative proposal  contained in document FCCC/AGBM/1997/INF.1. The article  also sets adoption and entry into force procedures.

Article 19 on annexes states that annexes are integral and  describes possible forms of annexes, procedures for their  adoption, voting, and entry into force. Several paragraphs  refer to 'annexes XY' as exceptions to the rules. A  footnote suggests the article may be revisited after  further discussion of QELROs.

Article 20 on attachments describes them as integral and  sets adoption and entry into force according to the article  on amendments. Proposed amendments to the commitment of any  Party in an attachment may be adopted only with consent of  the Party.

Article 21 on membership of regional economic integration  organizations contains a footnote that it will be revisited  in light of discussions on the 'bubble' concept. The  article forbidding reservations to the protocol (Article  23) includes a footnote that one Party, the US, placed a  reservation on it.

Article 24 concerning entry into force requires 50  ratifications from Parties combined with CO2 emissions  representing no less than 3 Gigatonnes of carbon. A  footnote states that there was no agreement on this  paragraph.

### NON-GROUP ON ARTICLE 4.1

The AGBM Chair's draft text addressed existing commitments  under FCCC Article 4.1 in Article 12 containing a chapeau  and 10 operative paragraphs. The article covers:•emissions inventories, their methodologies and related  cooperation; •mitigation and adaptation programmes; •technology transfer; •financial resources for managing sinks and reservoirs; •cooperation on impact assessments; •climate consideration in governmental decisions; •development of data archives and capacity building; •information exchange; •education and training; and •communications to the MOP on implementation of  commitments.

An article on financial resources (Article 13) was reviewed  by a contact group chaired by John Ashe (Antigua and  Barbuda). It referred to the Convention's financial  mechanism serving the protocol, provision of additional  funding by Annex II Parties, guidance of the financial  mechanism by the MOP and multilateral funding sources.

On 23 October, the non-group, chaired by Evans King  (Trinidad and Tobago), discussed the chapeau and second  paragraph of the AGBM Chair's draft. There was some support  for adding a reference to common but differentiated  responsibilities. Delegates could not agree on whether to  advance commitments 'in accordance with' Convention  Articles 4.3, 4.5 and 4.7, as favored by developing  countries, or 'taking into account' those articles, as  proposed by developed countries. Delegates disagreed about  a portion of a consensus text offered by the non-group  Chair in which Parties would work toward sustainable  development. A delegation suggested replacing the chapeau  with Convention and Berlin Mandate language.

On three sub-paragraphs describing national inventories and  related methodologies and cooperation, a delegate debated  whether the text constituted a new commitment for  developing countries or was a clarification of existing  common but differentiated commitments. A regional group  suggested combining sub-paragraphs on inventories or  methodologies. Another group suggested replacement text for  all three. A delegation proposed deleting all references to  the Convention and to financial resources. A small group  was convened in the evening to try to address the various  recommendations.

On 27 October, the non-group discussed a non-paper proposed  by its Chair. Delegates were unclear whether the AGBM  Chair's consolidated negotiating text remained the basis  for negotiations. A delegation indicated that agreement on  an initial paragraph containing a reference to the  advancement of commitments based on differentiated  responsibilities and national priorities would be  contingent upon outcomes in other areas. A group of  countries said that advancement of existing developing  countries' commitments depends on the provision of  financial resources and transfer of technology. Some  delegates pointed out the lack of progress in negotiations.

On 28 October, the non-group completed its last meeting at  AGBM-8 with agreement only on a chapeau. The non-group  Chair presented revised texts for most paragraphs in the  AGBM Chair's draft Article 12. Delegates discussion focused  on three. In a paragraph on national communications,  delegates discussed a number of bracketed alternatives. In  the paragraph on national programmes, a group of countries  said the paragraph represents new commitments for  developing countries. A Party suggested that the text  fleshes out existing commitments. One Party objected to  text on removing obstacles to the 'limitation' of  anthropogenic emissions. Another proposed 'limitation or  abatement in the increase' of emissions.

In a paragraph on reporting, a Party proposed moving the  text into a separate protocol article. A group of countries  said the paragraph should be divided to define Annex-I and  non-Annex-I responsibilities. A regional group objected to  separating developed and developing country  responsibilities in the paragraph. On the draft article on  finance (Article 13), the non-group discussed various  proposals for bracketed portions of the text without  reaching consensus.

On 30 October, in Plenary, the non-group Chair introduced  the group's report (FCCC/AGBM/1997/CRP.1) on FCCC Article  4.1. He said that the text can establish the boundaries for  future negotiation. There is no agreement on: mitigation  and adaptation programmes, technology transfer, or taking  account of climate change in policy. He said financing of  measures to advance existing non-Annex I Party commitments  and their relation to technology transfer is a substantive  issue whose resolution will clarify other issues.

A representative of the environmental NGOs said the FCCC  Article applies to all Parties. The non-group failed to  adequately advance implementation, producing text riddled  with qualifications and weak language. Article 4.1 should  not be used to negotiate commitments for developing  countries through the back door.

The G-77/CHINA objected to a list of 'economically  justified' mitigation programmes, suggesting it represented  new developing country commitments and mirrored the P&Ms  annex still under negotiation. She had similar objections  to the following subparagraph's adaptation programmes list,  preferring to retain the G-77/CHINA's alternative,  separately describing Annex I and developing country  programmes. JAPAN, the EU and the US preferred to remove  brackets from the mitigation list, noting that it is  indicative. The US said the list does not contain new  commitments, but puts 'flesh on the bones' of Article 4.1b.

On transfer of technology, the G-77/CHINA proposed the  deletion of a paragraph on promoting effective modalities  for transfers because it would introduce unacceptable new  commitments under the protocol. She supported an  alternative paragraph, based on the FCCC and Agenda 21. The  US, supported by JAPAN and CANADA, suggested combining  elements in the two paragraphs but objected to references  to 'financial and fiscal incentives' and 'patent-protected  environmentally sound technologies.' On procedures to ensure that climate change considerations  are taken into account in governmental and  intergovernmental decisions, the US recalled NGO support  for environmental impact assessment and climate friendly  technology. The EU, supported by the US, proposed a  reformulation of text on procedures, specifying  multilateral development banks. The G-77/CHINA said the  commitment should not be subsumed in a protocol with a  limited thrust, which would amount to a new commitment. She  said the reference to multilateral development banks would  introduce a conditionality to financing. On sharing  national development information and indicators, the G-77/CHINA objected to the paragraph because it would amount  to a new commitment.

Chair Estrada remarked that Parties will have to limit the  scope of the protocol below what was agreed in Berlin at  some point.

On education and training, the US introduced an amendment  on strengthening national level education and training  programmes, removed brackets from a reference to training  experts 'in particular for developing countries', and  replaced a reference to methodologies with 'modalities.' On communications on implementation of protocol  commitments, the G-77/CHINA said that communications should  be forwarded to the FCCC Parties. The US explained that  FCCC Parties' communications will go to the COP; for  protocol Parties, they will go to the protocol body. The G-77/CHINA would not agree to report to any body but the COP.

During the closing Plenary, the US noted that words had  been added that had not appeared previously in the  document. The PHILIPPINES said brackets around the  paragraph on communications to the MOP were missing.

The final document on commitments in FCCC Article 4.1  (FCCC/AGBM/1997/CRP.1/REV.1) contains a chapeau taking  account of Parties' common but differentiated  responsibilities and specific development priorities.  Without introducing new commitments for non-Annex I  Parties, it reaffirms and pledges to advance existing  commitments taking account of FCCC Articles 4.3, 4.5 and  4.7.

In a paragraph on inventories, Parties would formulate  cost-effective [national] and [regional] programmes,  reflecting the socio-economic conditions of each Party. Two  alternatives address mitigation and adaptation programmes.  The first option's mitigation section brackets minimizing  effects on other Parties. It contains a bracketed list of  measures to remove obstacles to the limitation or abatement  of an increase in emissions, including energy efficiency,  regulatory reform, improvements in the transport and  industrial sectors, management of sinks and reservoirs,  agriculture and waste management, and voluntary  arrangements with industry. Its list of adaptation measures  brackets infrastructure improvements and lists technology  deployment, coastal zone management, research, technical  capacity building and awareness raising, among others. The  second bracketed alternative states that each developed  country Party shall incorporate in its programmes the  protocol's QELROs and related P&Ms, including details on  technology transfer, provision of new and additional  financial resources, and assistance in meeting developing  countries' adaptation costs. It requires developing country  Parties to seek to include in their national  communications, as appropriate, information on programmes  that contain measures that they believe address climate  change and its impacts.

Two alternatives address technology transfer, with most  text in at least one set of brackets. The first, a single  paragraph, would promote modalities for removing barriers  to investment in, development, application and diffusion,  including transfer of, environmentally sound technologies,  considering policies and programmes for transfer through  [financial and fiscal] incentives.

The second alternative has six paragraphs. Among its  provisions, this option would take all practicable steps to  promote, facilitate and finance, as appropriate, transfer  and access to environmentally sound technologies, including  technologies in the public domain. It would encourage the  private sector through financial and fiscal incentives to  enhance access to and transfer of patent-protected  technologies, particularly to developing countries. Other  provisions would: implement procedures for incorporating  climate considerations in government and intergovernmental  decisions; promote information sharing on indicators; and  mandate cooperation in research and observation, education  and training. Parties would communicate information on  their implementation to the MOP, using guidelines adopted  by the COP or subsequently by the MOP.

The Chair noted in final Plenary that the document on  financial resources for existing commitments under Article  4.1 (FCCC/AGBM/1997/CRP.1/REV.1/Add.1) should bracket the  final paragraph on MOP decisions. The final text in the  finance article takes account of FCCC Article 4, paragraphs  4, 5, 7, 8 and 9. It states that Annex II Parties shall  provide [new and] additional financial resources to meet  the full agreed costs of developing country Parties'  activities in inventories, information sharing, research  and education and training under the protocol. Annex II  Parties would also provide resources for developing country  Parties' full incremental costs of protocol measures in  mitigation, adaptation and related technology transfer. The  bracketed final paragraph states that the MOP shall decide  on policies, priorities and eligibility criteria for the  protocol's financial mechanism.

The two documents covering existing commitments under  Article 4.1 were adopted.

### CLOSING PLENARY

On 31 October, Chair Raúl Estrada-Oyuela opened the last  AGBM-8 meeting by requesting that delegates focus on  documents on policies and measures, QELROS, institutions  and mechanisms and advancement of commitments under FCCC  Article 4.1, resulting from comments and amendments by  delegations. He said the non-group drafts would be compiled  in a single document (FCCC/CP/1997/2) to be presented to  COP-3 for finalization. Delegates agreed that the documents  presented and discussed would be referred to COP-3.

The US said it should be noted that while brackets reflect  disagreement in some cases, in others the absence of  brackets also reflects disagreement. Supported by Japan and  the EU, but opposed by the G-77/CHINA, he encouraged the  Chair to develop his own draft text for consideration  alongside the compilation. CHINA said success of any future  text lies in its consistency with the Berlin Mandate.

The US requested an examination of how the protocol could  pursue world peace while protecting the planet, through a  provision on military operations for security and self  defense. Negotiations should not create a conflict between  the need to secure peace and to reduce GHG emissions.

Delegates discussed a conclusion proposed by the Chair that  Annex I Parties would provide the Secretariat with data on  indicators in Annex B for time frames mentioned in the  Berlin Mandate to facilitate consideration in Kyoto of  differentiation criteria. The Chair said he was trying to  reach an understanding of how to understand  differentiation. The UK said the conclusion should be  neutral, indicating that differentiated and flat rates were  both on the table. Supported by the US and SWITZERLAND, he  asked whether the Secretariat could collect comparable data  from international sources. NORWAY said delegations should  provide relevant data. ICELAND, JAPAN, and AUSTRALIA said  the consideration could be based on available data. The  conclusion was adopted requesting that delegations provide  the Secretariat with information on data from international  sources.

The PHILIPPINES summarized informal negotiations on sinks.  He said consultations would continue through a  questionnaire on core issues circulated to interested  delegations, compiled by fax and e-mail and discussed again  by the informal group in Kyoto.

Regarding a 'so-called prompt start,' the Chair suggested  that the COP request that SBI and SBSTA review the Kyoto  outcome and propose which body would deal with various  elements.

He noted that the Berlin Mandate calls for a protocol or  another legal instrument. In addition to the preparation of  a negotiating text for a protocol, he will structure the  proposals as a possible set of amendments to the FCCC.

The Chair said AGBM-8 would be reconvened on 30 November to  continue a number of discussions. He said he would produce  the text in the form of a protocol and an oral report to  COP-3 that may mention a Brazilian proposal, which contains  an alternative calculation of QELROs based on historical  emissions. He also said that because he judged evolution of  developing country commitments to be beyond the Berlin  Mandate, he did not include an evolution proposal in the  draft text. He said he would mention that proposal in his  presentation of the AGBM report as a point AGBM did not  consider.

Rapporteur Daniel Reifsnyder (US) presented the report of  the session (FCCC/AGBM/1997/.L1), which he said would be  completed with the Secretariat's and Chair's guidance. The  report was adopted.

SAMOA, on behalf of AOSIS, said sinks must be resolved,  addressing uncertainty and lack of data. He called for  early action in the period between adoption and entry into  force, including arrangements similar to the Convention's  intergovernmental negotiating committee. Economic, social  and environmental devastation is a price we cannot afford.  He said delegates should not lose sight of the moral  dimension, or the repugnance of allowing a few to be  sacrificed for others' short-term economic interests.

The G-77/CHINA contrasted developing countries' survival  emissions and the luxury emissions of the developed world.  Decisions might mean no food on peoples' tables, not a  smaller profit margin. He said developed countries must  modify producing and consuming lifestyles. He rejected  mounting pressure on developing countries to do what  developed countries refused to do, and criticized the  veiled threat to withhold financial resources and  technology transfer if developing countries do not assume  the burden.

ZIMBABWE, on behalf of the African Group, stressed equity  and said negotiations were hampered by weak proposals and  Parties without targets on the table. Stabilization and  unquantified targets do not help much at this stage.

JAPAN said he believes other difficulties can be overcome  with support from all participants. The EU said its members  were disappointed with the little progress here, and  regretted the absence or inadequacy of proposals from other  industrialized countries. He said the protocol was  ambitious, as were the EU targets. The US was disappointed  in the lack of conclusions on key issues. He agreed with  the EU that a QELROs target should advance countries'  efforts. He said he believed the US approach would be an  advance.

Executive Secretary Michael Zammit-Cutajar emphasized a  deficit in expected contributions, especially a US$450,000  shortfall in the Kyoto participation fund for developing  country delegates.

Chair Estrada said he was trying to understand 'exactly  where we stand.' He said the paper produced for AGBM-8 was  an attempt to preserve positions, where he had tried to  find compromise. He said it was a pity many things were  still missing, such as clearer work on sinks and  differentiation. He said he was not yet in a position to  assess the value of the negotiating text, but that he would  continue seeking common ground and presenting his own  versions of texts when he believes it will contribute to  the success of delegates' work.

The meeting was suspended until 30 November 1997.

## SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION

### OPENING PLENARY

On 20 October, SBI Vice-Chair José Romero (Switzerland), on  behalf of SBI Chair Mahmoud Ould El-Ghaouth (Mauritania),  reminded delegates of the short time allocated for SBI  negotiations at this session and urged them to conclude in  a timely manner.

FCCC Executive Secretary Michael Zammit-Cutajar noted the  need for support in developing initial national  communications and strengthening national capacities. He  noted that projects for national communications can 'prime  the pump' for future investments as much as pilot projects  for lowering emissions. Regarding the FCCC core budget, he  noted a number of delinquent contributions and additional  contributions to the trust fund for participation were  needed.

Delegates adopted the SBI agenda (FCCC/SBI/1997/17).

### ANNEX I COMMUNICATIONS

On 21 October, the Secretariat introduced the first  compilation and synthesis (FCCC/SBI/1997/19), an addendum  containing tables of inventories of anthropogenic emissions  and removals (Add.1); and updated information on GHG  emissions and projections (INF.4). The synthesis includes  information on 18 Parties that submitted their national  communications by 15 August 1997, accounting for 59% of  total 1990 GHG emissions from Annex I Parties. The  synthesis notes that CO2 emissions in 1995 increased in the  majority of reporting Parties compared to 1990, the range  of increase being from 2% to 10%.

The US supported the development of an electronic reporting  programme, and requested a report based on Party  suggestions for improvements. He noted that many Parties  did not follow the guidelines for reporting on their  policies and measures. The EU noted that: some Parties have  had difficulty complying with guidelines; non-Annex I  experts should participate in the review process; and its  communication is being finalized. Both the US and the EU  noted the inadequacy of reporting measures for HFCs, PFCs  and SF6.

CHINA stated that reporting should focus on CO2 policies  and measures should take into account different country  situations, and that the report does not adequately address  technology transfer. NEW ZEALAND said Parties should  nominate a range of experts for reviewing reports. With the  EU, she did not support the Secretariat's proposal to  discontinue the distribution of executive summaries drawn  from the communications. UZBEKISTAN said the participation  of national experts from countries with economies in  transition and developing countries could provide an  opportunity for training.

On 29 October, delegates adopted draft conclusions and a  draft decision for COP-3 on Annex I communications (FCCC/  SBI/1997/L.7). In these conclusions the SBI: requested the  Secretariat to evaluate the feasibility of compiling  available supplementary data from authoritative sources on  GHG emissions for the purpose of comparison with national  submissions, reporting to SBI-9; expressed its intent to  perform an interim assessment of the in-depth reviews of  second national communications for SBI-9; and noted with  regret that insufficient responses from Annex I Parties did  not allow presentation of the schedule of in-depth reviews  at SBI-7.

Under the draft decision, COP-3 would call upon Annex I  Parties to follow the revised FCCC guidelines and request  the Secretariat to prepare a full compilation of second  national communications and publish national GHG  inventories. COP-3 would decide that in-depth reviews of  second national communications will include visits by  review teams and executive summaries of the communications  will be published as official FCCC documents.

### NON-ANNEX I COMMUNICATIONS

On 20 October, the Secretariat summarized a progress report  (FCCC/SBI/1997/INF.3), including an update on preparation  of initial non-Annex I national communications. Nine  Parties have reported no activities on communications, and  no information is available from 15. The conclusions  included recommendations for: accelerated submissions;  reference by Parties to COP guidelines; appropriate  institutional mechanisms; awareness raising; GEF procedural  streamlining; a forum for inventory reporting; a provision  for reproduction and dissemination of reports; a  coordinated strategy for the transfer and development of  technologies; development of regional and local  methodologies; and regional workshops.

The Chair noted that Parties would also consider input from  the GEF and the process for considering non-Annex I  communications. On the latter, he invited the US and  MALAYSIA to chair a reconvened informal meeting to  consider, inter alia, submissions by the EU and Uzbekistan  (FCCC/SBI/1997/MISC.8). The EU said that reviews of  communications have built confidence and helped in  developing second national communications. BRAZIL reported  the conclusions of a recent workshop to share Latin  American experiences in developing national communications.  Participants there highlighted, inter alia, problems with  developing methodologies and the need for financial  support.

SENEGAL hosted an African regional workshop that brought  together more than 100 participants. The US cautioned that  consideration of some of the Secretariat report's  recommendations should follow submissions by a broader  sample of non-Annex I countries. MEXICO announced plans for  a regional workshop on preparation of national  communications in Central America. JAPAN said it was  willing to cooperate with developing countries preparing  national communications and noted its recent contributions.  ZIMBABWE called for assistance to the African region in  making digital information available.

MALAYSIA encouraged the Secretariat to continue its role in  coordinating regional activity and suggested that the COP  provide guidance to the GEF. CANADA underlined the  importance of capacity building, supported more expeditious  financial provision by the GEF, and noted the importance of  an in-depth review of communications in the context of  Article 4.1 commitments. JAMAICA supported a GEF-sponsored  regional workshop for CARICOM countries in November.

On 29 October, delegates adopted draft conclusions and a  draft decision produced by the contact group  (FCCC/SBI/1997/L.8). The draft SBI conclusions request the  Secretariat to organize a workshop on a process for  considering initial national communications from non-Annex  I Parties. The Secretariat is requested to submit its  observations on the national communications submitted by  non-Annex I Parties by 30 March 1998. The SBI also  requested the Secretariat to provide a compilation of  comments by Parties at SBI-8.

The draft decision for COP-3 was compiled from three  proposals. It contains bracketed language stating that the  process of consideration shall assist the Secretariat's  determination of the needs of non-Annex I Parties [for the  preparation of national communications] or [related to  implementation of commitments, in particular those  associated with proposed projects and response measures].  On the type of review, the text states that the  communications should be subject to an [in  depth][technical][assessment] or [review]. Regarding the  Secretariat's future work, the decision contains bracketed  text on compilation and synthesis [annually], as well as on  proposed workshops and the selection of expert review  teams. All references to work that the COP would request  SBI and SBSTA to perform on national communications are  bracketed.

### REVIEW OF THE FINANCIAL MECHANISM

On 20 October, the GEF introduced its report to COP-3  (FCCC/SBI/1997/22), which addressed how it had implemented  the guidance provided by previous COPs. She noted that  during the 13-month reporting period, total project funding  for climate change activities exceeded US$570 million, of  which approximately US$155 million was grant financing. She  said the report described activities undertaken by the GEF  to improve its performance, including a report on the  application of the concept of full incremental costs.

The EU said that the review of the financial mechanism  should be seen as an ongoing activity of the COP, that EU  members had already pressed for replenishment of the GEF,  and that it hoped that this meeting would agree to the  designation of the GEF as the financial mechanism. The G-77/CHINA reiterated its position on the need to continue  dialogue on the designation of the GEF as the FCCC  financial mechanism. INDIA pointed to the need to expand  the parameters that are used on the ground by the GEF for  the preparation of initial communications. Delegates  accepted the Vice-Chair's proposal to establish a joint  SBSTA/SBI drafting group on the financial mechanism, to be  chaired by John Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda).

On 21 October, the Vice-Chair informed delegations that a  proposed Chair's draft decision had been prepared and  appeared as Appendix III to document FCCC/SBI/1997/16.

On 29 October, delegates adopted two draft decisions for  COP-3 (FCCC/SBI/1997/L.9), produced by the contact group.  Under the first decision, the COP would decide to continue  the review process through SBI, in accordance with the  criteria established in the guidelines adopted by SBI-5.  Under the second decision, the COP would note that the GEF  Council approved the annex to the Memorandum of  Understanding between the COP and the GEF Council and  decide to approve the annex, thereby bringing it into  force.

### ACTIVITIES IMPLEMENTED JOINTLY (AIJ)

On 20 October, delegates considered activities implemented  jointly (AIJ) and selected Diego Malpede (Argentina) to  chair a working group to prepare recommendations for both  SBI and SBSTA. The US said delegates could recognize that  the pilot phase is still underway but agree that Parties  can take credit from AIJ toward post-2000 commitments,  congruent with decisions on methodological issues. The  issue is not whether, but how credit is taken. He suggested  adopting uniform reporting procedures and work programmes  on methodological issues, financing and additionality of  financing. The EU said AIJ reporting needs further  elaboration. Project baselines, scenarios and emissions  reductions should be more detailed. CANADA noted progress  in methodologies and benefits gained. She said the lack of  incentives for private sector engagement and of methodology  for transparency and consistency slowed some areas. She  looked forward to a US draft decision, especially on  credits and methodologies.

BRAZIL said given parallel negotiations on QELROs and  associated methodological issues, the review must be done,  but he would not support any COP-3 decision that prejudges  methodological work necessary to determine emissions  reductions. MALAYSIA said experience so far is not  comprehensive enough to make an assessment of AIJ. Only  after reporting baselines and methodologies are addressed  can delegates consider credits. CHINA said developing  country participation, GHG abatement results and investment  in AIJ have been limited, so it is premature for COP-3 to  make a decision based on 'scanty' estimates and analysis.  Partners should come forward with secure funding. SAUDI  ARABIA said the issue of credits is at the heart of AIJ and  should be ruled out for COP-3. ZIMBABWE noted only one  project among 53 African governments and said it is  premature to talk about trading or credits.

On 21 October, Parties continued discussing the AIJ pilot  phase. SRI LANKA noted the obstacles posed by the  additionality principle in the AIJ criteria and welcomed a  decision by France to delete the additionality condition  from its AIJ guidelines. INDIA, supported by VENEZUELA,  highlighted the limited scope and geographical distribution  of current projects and the narrow information base  available for assessment. He said a comprehensive review of  the pilot phase would not be possible as envisaged by the  COP. He called for more projects utilizing frontline  technologies and clear data on GHG reductions, cost  effectiveness and contribution to capacity building.  AUSTRALIA said Parties must capture the advantages in cost  effectiveness and environmental gains. He noted the  importance of flexibility in financing AIJ and announced an  Australian AIJ initiative with three developing countries.

On 28 October, delegates adopted draft COP decisions on  AIJ. The decisions, produced by a joint SBSTA/SBI contact  group, were also adopted by SBSTA on 28 October (see page  14).

### DEVELOPMENT AND TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY

On 20 October, the SBI Vice-Chair suggested establishing a  joint SBI/SBSTA contact group to address development and  transfer of technology. The US said it would submit a draft  decision requesting that the Secretariat continue  disseminating information and expand the technology needs  survey, that SBSTA examine government and private sector  activities, and that Parties encourage market policies  promoting trade and investment in climate-friendly  technologies and improved reporting on technical needs and  arrangements. On 28 October, SBI delegates adopted the  draft COP decision on the development and transfer of  technology, which was adopted by SBSTA on 27 October (see  page 15).

### PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE CONVENTION

On 20 October, delegates considered four proposed  amendments to the Convention (FCCC/SBI/1997/15). The Vice- Chair asked delegates to decide whether SBI should make  recommendations to the COP regarding the amendments. One  submitted by Pakistan and Azerbaijan would remove Turkey  from Annexes I and II. Pakistan noted Turkey's status as a  medium developed country and its fractional emissions  compared to the Annex I average. TURKEY said it intends to  become a Party, but its burden would be disproportionate  given its economic circumstances.

The EU said all OECD members should adopt commitments under  a protocol. He opposed the amendment, pending a possible  special regime for Turkey, Mexico and the Republic of  Korea, or Turkey's indication of a target it would assume.

The REPUBLIC OF KOREA distinguished between the status it  shares with Mexico as a non-Annex I Party and that of  Turkey. He said it was another matter whether Korea would  voluntarily assume emissions reductions. MEXICO said there  were no grounds to include Mexico and the Republic of Korea  in possible protocol annexes. He rejected attempts to link  membership in any organization with Convention obligations.

JAPAN and CANADA said all cases, including Turkey's, should  fall within an overall review of Annexes required by  December 1998. The US said a recommendation would be easier  to develop when the post-2000 regime and various nations'  roles become clear.

An amendment proposed by the EU would permit adoption of a  protocol by three-fourths majority if consensus is absent,  and would apply the protocol provisionally pending its  entry into force. The EU said the amendment allows the  majority's desire for urgent action to be met. He  recommended leaving the amendment on the table for COP-3.

SAUDI ARABIA said the amendment opened the door for many  more and that provisional application violated the  Convention. VENEZUELA said provisional application was  'absurd' and not a proper amendment. The US and CHINA  expressed reservations about provisional application.  AUSTRALIA said he cannot accept a protocol with economic  implications adopted by majority voting. The REPUBLIC OF  KOREA opposed the amendment.

An amendment proposed by KUWAIT calls on Annex I Parties to  provide financial resources, including technology transfer,  determined by the COP to meet the full incremental costs of  developing countries' obligations. SAUDI ARABIA said the  amendment is the only way to ensure necessary funds are  forthcoming. The UK, the US, AUSTRALIA, JAPAN and  SWITZERLAND did not accept the amendment.

The Vice-Chair suggested a conclusion noting that proposed  amendments be forwarded to COP-3, recommending that the COP  take account of views expressed by the SBI. On 29 October,  language in the draft report of the meeting stated that SBI  would recommend to the COP that any proposed amendments be  taken up in the order they were submitted, if appropriate.  SAUDI ARABIA proposed deleting 'if appropriate,' but the EU  supported its retention. KUWAIT proposed that all  amendments be taken as 'a package.' Delegates agreed to  remove the phrase as 'as appropriate.'

### ARRANGEMENTS FOR COP-3

On 27 October, FCCC Executive Secretary Michael Zammit- Cutajar said discussions with the Japanese Government were  on the verge of a successful conclusion. He described the  legal understanding that had been reached with Japan.  Without prejudice, the Government of Japan will extend to  representatives of Parties and others involved in COP-3  such services, facilities, security privileges and immunity  as provided to other international and UN conferences in  Japan.

JAPAN acknowledged that it had virtually succeeded in  concluding issues with the Secretariat.

SBI Chair Mahmoud Ould El-Ghaouth introduced a draft  decision to hold COP-4 in Bonn in November 1998 and  requests that the Secretariat make necessary arrangements.  The decision was adopted.

On the G-77/CHINA's proposed agenda for COP-3's high-level  segment, the Chair said the segment would be organized with  a traditional first-come, first-served list of speakers. He  said the G-77/CHINA proposal could be distributed as an  official document, which SAUDI ARABIA, KUWAIT and CHINA  requested.

In the draft report of the meeting, the SBI adopted  conclusions under which it reiterated its gratitude to  Japan and requested the Secretariat to conclude its  arrangements on the basis of the understanding reached  between the Executive Secretary and the Government of  Japan.

### CLOSING PLENARY

On 29 October, SBI-7 held its final session. Delegates  adopted draft conclusions and draft decisions for COP-3.  Rapporteur Patricia Iturregui (Peru) presented the draft  report of the meeting (FCCC/SBI/1997/L.6 and CRP.9).  Delegates adopted draft COP decisions on the financial  performance of the Convention in the biennium 1996-1997  (FCCC/SBI/1997/L.11) and on COP-4 (FCCC/SBI/1997/L.10). The  SBI also took note of the Secretariat's report on  mechanisms for consultation with NGOs  (FCCC/SBI/1997/Misc.7) and agreed to consider this issue at  SBI-8. The report was adopted, as amended. In closing, the  Chair said his successor should ensure that SBI is free of  debate, and continues to serve as the FCCC's operational  arm.

## SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL ADVICE

On 20 October, SBSTA Chair Tibor Faragó (Hungary) urged  delegations to make progress on outstanding issues as this  would be the last SBSTA session before COP-3. Delegates  adopted the agenda, as contained in document  FCCC/SBSTA/1997/7.

### COOPERATION WITH OTHER INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

On 23 October, SBSTA held an informal joint session with  the IPCC and heard questions from delegates. IPCC Chair Dr.  Robert Watson introduced a paper containing 16 IPCC  decisions taken at its September meeting. He noted that the  Third Assessment Report (TAR) would cover a range of  scientific, technical, economic and social issues. It will  consist of reports of IPCC Working Groups I (scientific  aspects), II (vulnerability of systems) and III  (mitigation), and will focus heavily on regional aspects.  The three Working Group reports, which will be approved by  late 2000 or early 2001, will be integrated into a policy  relevant Synthesis Report, which will be completed by the  second quarter of 2001.

On 24 October, SBSTA considered two documents prepared by  the WMO: a report by the Conference on the World Climate  Change Research Program (FCCC/SBSTA/1997/Misc.6) and a  document that explores ways to further enhance coordination  between the work of international organizations on climatic  issues, including monitoring of GHGs in the atmosphere  (FCCC/SBSTA/1997/8).

IPCC Chair emeritus Bert Bolin highlighted recent findings.  He said climate inertia and the long life of gases means  that the full effects of past emissions will occur even if  future emissions are reduced, slowing the effect of  emissions reductions. Even if Annex I countries reduce  emissions 30-90%, global emissions would reach two to three  times 1990 levels. He said a slow start is difficult to  correct later. He also noted large margins of error in  calculating natural sources and sinks, such that an  accurate calculation for terrestrial sources and sinks is  not presently possible.

IPCC Chair Watson summarized the Panel's report on regional  impacts, noting that it assesses vulnerability to climate  change because the ability to predict impacts for specific  places and times is limited. The report covers 10 regions.  Among the key conclusions are: ecosystems, especially  forests and coral reefs, are highly sensitive to climate  change; billions of people could be affected by exacerbated  problems in drinking water supply, sanitation, and drought;  food production could decrease in the tropics and  subtropics, despite steady global production; significantly  adverse effects on small island States and low-lying deltas  such as in Bangladesh, Egypt and China could displace tens  of millions of people with one meter of sea-level rise;  heat stress mortality and vector-borne diseases could  increase; and most effects are negative for the most  vulnerable developing countries. He also highlighted  regional findings.

CANADA, MALAYSIA and the MARSHALL ISLANDS said the COP  should address the decline of global observation networks,  while SAUDI ARABIA had reservations. The US said the  findings emphasize the need for developing countries'  participation and that their vulnerability underscores the  urgency of action. The MARSHALL ISLANDS said the  vulnerability report was a 'death sentence' for small  island States, and that the TAR must clarify scenarios and  determine what is dangerous. CHINA said it is impossible  for developing countries to adopt actions for the next 100  years.

ZIMBABWE introduced a report on a joint SBSTA/IPCC meeting  on the IPCC's Third Assessment Report. The joint meeting  was informed of the IPCC's decisions regarding the scope,  structure, content, timing and dissemination of the TAR. On  policy relevant questions to be addressed, Parties made the  following suggestions: a reference to additional gases that  are believed to have a radiative forcing impact, and the  importance of monitoring the adequacy of the systematic  observation system (US); the use of non-English language  references in support of IPCC reports (MONGOLIA); and  explanations of the range of uncertainty in IPCC findings  (MALAYSIA).

SBSTA delegates asked a number of questions regarding IPCC  decisions, such as whether: the IPCC would consider  developing an overall environmental objective for the FCCC  processes; existing long-term observation and satellite  systems were adequate; and the IPCC deadlines for comments  were flexible. On the TAR, delegates asked, inter alia,  whether: uncertainties in projections and conclusions would  be addressed; research methodologies and techniques would  be adequately spelled out; and several options and  scenarios would be included.

On 28 October, the International Civil Aviation  Organization (ICAO) reported on its increased cooperation  with the COP, particularly through research on the impact  of aircraft emissions on climate change.

UNEP introduced a report on 'The Technology and Economic  Assessments Under the Montreal Protocol: Terms of Reference  and Future Work.' The presentation dealt with the UNEP  Technology and Economic Assessment Panel (TEAP) under the  Montreal Protocol, its structure and mandates. He said a  number of aspects concerning HCFCs will be considered and  that he would be prepared to assist the FCCC.

On the two WMO reports, MONGOLIA and MALAYSIA noted the  need to enhance the global observation network. AUSTRALIA  said the maintenance of long-term homogenous records is  essential for climate monitoring. He urged the GEF to  consider further funding of GHG monitoring. CANADA  encouraged Parties to sustain and expand the Global  Atmosphere Watch network. The EU recommended that the WMO  work with the IPCC and others on network design,  harmonization and analysis. He urged the GEF to support  developing countries' observation capacity. The US said the  WMO's concerns about the long-term sustainability of the  global monitoring system must be taken seriously. UGANDA  said the lack of data on Africa was a serious concern. He  called on the GEF to assist.

The Chair introduced his draft conclusions on cooperation  with relevant international organizations. The US suggested  a reference to SBSTA's desire to give further consideration  to observation systems at its next session. On a list of  key issues to be addressed in the TAR (Annex I), CHINA  added general suggestions on improving assessments by  narrowing the range of uncertainties and indicating the  limitations of results, and on the advisory nature of  reports. On cooperation with the IPCC (Annex II), the UK  introduced amendments to specify the nature of the IPCC's  prompt responses to SBSTA's requests for input. On  observational networks (Annex III), the US introduced two  new paragraphs: one recognizing concerns raised by relevant  intergovernmental organizations regarding the  sustainability of observation systems, and a second  requesting that the SBSTA, through the Secretariat and the  IPCC, consider the adequacy of observing systems and report  to COP-4. With suggestions from UGANDA and MALAYSIA, CANADA  introduced a replacement paragraph calling on Parties to  provide the necessary resources to reverse the decline in  systematic observation networks and support observational  system development. These amendments were incorporated into  the draft conclusions.

Under SBSTA's draft decision on cooperation with the IPCC,  the COP would express appreciation to the IPCC for its  contribution to the FCCC process, particularly its prompt  response to SBSTA's requests. Under the draft decision on  the development of observational networks, the COP would  urge Parties to provide the necessary resources to reverse  the decline in the existing observational network and  support the observation systems through appropriate funding  mechanisms. The COP would also request SBSTA to consider  the adequacy of these observational systems and report to  COP-4.

### NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS FROM ANNEX I PARTIES

On 20 October, the Chair highlighted an annex on  methodological issues to the first compilation and  synthesis of second national communications  (FCCC/SBI/1997/19). In the annex, the Secretariat notes  that in general Parties presented their inventory data in  accordance with the IPCC guidelines. The annex covers  issues related to: transparency and comparability;  completeness; confidence levels; recalculation of the base  year inventory; the use of Global Warming Potentials  (GWPs); emissions from the land-use change and forestry  sector; and reporting of other GHGs.

The EU noted that the list of various issues that needed  further study might not be complete. He said other issues  were likely to arise in the near future, based on new Annex  I national communications and experiences gained during in- depth reviews. He stated that FCCC guidelines for Annex I  national communications would need regular maintenance and  improvement. INDIA raised points on the types of gases that  ought to be included in inventories and criteria to ensure  transparency and comparability.

The US called for recommendations on how to use the IPCC  methods and noted that GWPs, although not perfect, may be a  suitable method for drawing comparisons. He asked the  Secretariat to prepare a list of issues that could be  addressed by SBSTA in preparing rules. MALAYSIA questioned  the scientific basis for using GWPs and said they do not  provide clear GHG inventories. The MARSHALL ISLANDS called  for the inclusion of developing country experts on the  review teams. The Chair asked the Secretariat to prepare a  text for consideration by the joint SBI/SBSTA contact group  on this issue.

On 24 October, delegates discussed draft conclusions on  national communications from Annex I Parties. Under the  draft conclusions, SBSTA invited Parties to submit by 15  March 1998 their views on possible approaches to  methodological issues for consideration at SBI-8. SBSTA  invited Annex I Parties to make available their complete  1996 GHG inventories by 6 June 1998. SBSTA-9 will consider  additions or amendments to the FCCC guidelines for national  communications.

### METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES

On 21 October, delegates considered a progress report on  methodological issues (FCCC/SBSTA/1997/9) and a technical  paper entitled 'Methodological Issues: Temperature  Adjustments' (FCCC/TP/1997/2). The progress report  elaborates on the issue of adjustments to national GHG  inventories and projections, in particular those related to  temperature fluctuations. The Secretariat compiled  information on adjustments submitted by Parties in the  first and second national communications and analyzed the  limitations of various methods and their implications.

The EU said individual Parties should choose whether and  how to apply adjustments, but should describe their  approaches in detail. Parties should report inventories  without adjustments. The US said careful construction of  baselines and targets compensates for temperature and other  fluctuations. Multi-year averaging compensates for short- term fluctuations and requires no adjustments.

MALAYSIA questioned the scientific basis for using GWPs and  said they do not provide clear GHG inventories. The Chair  asked the Secretariat to prepare a text for consideration  by the joint SBI/SBSTA contact group on this issue.  TANZANIA presented a draft decision that calls on SBSTA to  identify gaps developing countries face in research and  development of methodologies, monitoring and assessment  capacity, and observational networks. It calls on SBI to  eliminate the gaps and provide financial and technical  support.

On 28 October, delegates agreed to draft conclusions under  which SBSTA requested the Secretariat to prepare a report  that identifies the gaps faced by developing countries in  research and development on methodologies related to GHG  inventories. Following an amendment from the EU, SBSTA  further concluded that weather adjustments, in particular  temperature adjustments, to national GHG inventory and  projections may be a useful tool for assessing the  effectiveness of P&Ms. Individual Parties might choose  whether adjustments were applied, in addition to reporting  unadjusted inventory data, and if so, which methods were  chosen.

Delegates also considered a draft decision for adoption by  COP-3 (FCCC/SBSTA/1997/L.5) under which the COP reaffirms  that Parties should use the Revised 1996 Guidelines for  National GHG inventories of the IPCC. The draft decision  also contained bracketed text reaffirming that Global  Warming Potentials used by Parties should be those provided  by the IPCC. The US proposed removing the brackets. CHINA  said the paragraph should be deleted. The Chair noted that  the AGBM Chair had requested advice from SBSTA and the  substance of the answer is independent of any AGBM outcome.  MALAYSIA and the EU said a decision on this should await  the outcome of the protocol negotiations. Delegates agreed  that no draft decision for COP-3 should be produced.

### ACTIVITIES IMPLEMENTED JOINTLY (AIJ)

On 20 October, the Secretariat introduced a synthesis  report on the AIJ pilot phase (FCCC/SBSTA/1997/12, Add.1,  Corr. 1, and Corr.2). The conclusions of the synthesis  report state, inter alia: the participation of Parties in  AIJ programmes and activities is slowly expanding; the bulk  of AIJ is between Annex I Parties, with host countries  being economies in transition; the total GHG estimated to  be reduced is distributed over various types of activities,  such as forestry preservation and afforestation activities;  and Parties appear to be approaching the pilot phase  cautiously. The Secretariat said there had been 67 AIJ  projects during the pilot phase and further project offers  were contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/1997/Inf.3.

The G-77/CHINA noted the limited spread of projects and  suggested that COP-3 would be unable to reach any  conclusions on the exercise. The EU called for clearer  guidance regarding the definition of a number of  information items required during the AIJ pilot phase: the  compatibility with and supportiveness of national economic  development, socio-economic and environmental priorities;  emissions reduction calculations; project lifetime;  uncertainty in establishing estimates and measurements;  baseline definition; and estimating mitigation costs.  ZIMBABWE called for a good spread of AIJ projects by  sector, country and region and supported the view that  current information could not provide the basis for  decisions at COP-3. INDIA noted the absence of precise  information on the amount of GHG reductions and costs and  agreed that current data were insufficient to reach a  judgment on the pilot phase.

MALAYSIA expressed concern that problems still prevail in  terms of assessing the pilot phase and underlined the  importance of methodological issues. UZBEKISTAN called for  the inclusion of a methodological item on determining  socio-economic benefits and noted that there were few AIJ  projects in his region. SRI LANKA noted the poor response  to his country's attempts to find a developed country  partner for AIJ, despite the interest of several parties in  his country.

The US said the COP should endorse the progress made on  AIJ. He said delegates should bear in mind that many  projects have yet to receive host country approval, even  those meeting all criteria and not seeking credit. He urged  SBSTA to address the complexity of the guidelines, and said  it should prioritize requirements rather than wait until  all complexities are resolved. MAURITIUS said AIJ must be  given the chance to expand to more countries and sectors.

SWITZERLAND supported the development of a priority work  programme that could be endorsed by the COP. She noted that  the lack of capacity in the potential host countries  creates a barrier for AIJ's progress. The CENTRAL AFRICAN  REPUBLIC supported deferring decisions on AIJ to later  meetings when projects are more equitably distributed.  BHUTAN said despite its very low capacity, it hopes  delegates keep an open mind regarding methodological  issues. BURKINA FASO said COP-3 should extend the process.  NEPAL said AIJ could be a small but indispensable tool for  countries' national programmes and technical training. The  RUSSIAN FEDERATION said COP-3 could take the necessary  decisions on issues such as new forms of AIJ. COSTA RICA  said the possibility of credits would bring a desirable  number and type of new projects.

On 24 October, the Co-Chair of the AIJ contact group  reported that the group had worked from proposals by the  US, Norway and Switzerland, which the Co-Chair tried to  incorporate. The G-77/CHINA requested more time and later  submitted a new proposal. Delegates agreed to allow more  time for the contact group to reach consensus.

On 28 October, SBSTA forwarded the synthesis report on AIJ  to the COP, and recommended a draft decision to be adopted  by COP-3 that reaffirms decision 5/CP.1 on AIJ under the  pilot phase, notes the synthesis report, and adopts the  uniform reporting format contained in document  FCCC/SBSTA/1997/INF.3.

### ROSTER OF EXPERTS

On 21 October, delegates considered a report on the  experience of the Secretariat in using the roster of  experts (FCCC/SBSTA/1997/11), and a document containing  nominations to the roster (FCCC/SBSTA/1996/INF.6). The  report notes that the current roster contains 312 nominees  from 44 Parties, of which 184 are from Annex I Parties and  128 are from non-Annex I Parties. The five most frequently  represented fields of expertise are energy technology,  natural resources management, mitigation and planning,  water resources management, and environmental economics.

The EU noted that Parties should review the information on  the current roster and submit additional nominations to the  Secretariat, particularly of experts with backgrounds  related to the economic and financial aspects of transfer  of technology. With regard to the issue of  Intergovernmental Technical Advisory Panels (ITAPs), she  pointed out that until now SBSTA had not been able to  establish the panels, mainly because of difficulties in  agreeing on a structure. She said the structure should  facilitate a flexible and effective approach and indicated  that a number of small working groups could be established  to deal with SBSTA's scientific and methodological issues.

The G-77/CHINA reiterated that the establishment of ITAPs  is central to SBSTA's work, particularly on technology  transfer and know-how. The US said it was premature to take  a decision on ITAPs and encouraged better use of the roster  through increased participation by experts. The US said  nothing precluded putting the EU proposal into effect right  away.

JAPAN and ZIMBABWE agreed that although a useful tool, the  roster lacked geographical balance, perhaps due to  inadequate dissemination of information on the roster in  certain regions. MALAYSIA and INDIA noted an emerging  consensus that some of the issues need to be studied by  groups of experts.

On 28 October, the Chair invited comments on draft  conclusions in a paper drawn up by Zimbabwe, Malaysia,  India, the US, Canada, and the Netherlands on the Roster of  Experts. The NETHERLANDS explained that the essence of the  draft conclusions is a request to the Secretariat to  continue using the roster for methodological and technical  guidance and an invitation to prepare an evaluation before  COP-5. The draft conclusions also deal with: ITAPS;  expansion of the roster in the field of methodologies; the  criteria for utilizing members of the roster; a review of  the standardized form for collecting information on  nominees; and a request that the Secretariat report on  criteria used for selection.

SAUDI ARABIA expressed concern about the possibility of  important tasks being dominated by one region. The  PHILIPPINES introduced an amendment on criteria for using  members of the roster, ensuring that the element of  capacity building is fully respected. MALAYSIA pointed out  that SBSTA could request, not authorize, that the  Secretariat continue using the roster.

SBSTA adopted draft conclusions on the roster of experts.  In utilizing the roster, SBSTA requested that the  Secretariat, inter alia, take into account certain criteria  such as experts' relevant professional backgrounds,  balanced regional representation and capacity building.  SBSTA also concluded that, to date, 'there had not been  sufficient experience to fully evaluate the utility of the  roster or its use by the Secretariat' and requested further  evaluation of the roster for COP-5.

### DEVELOPMENT AND TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY

On 21 October, delegates considered the activities of  Parties included in Annex II related to transfer of  technology (FCCC/SBSTA/1997/13). The report provides a  compilation and synthesis of actions taken by reporting  Annex II Parties with respect to finance and transfer of  technology, and describes how reporting guidelines were  followed in preparing national communications. The US said  the report demonstrates the extensive amount of work  underway, but noted that many countries cannot provide the  information required by the guidelines. The EU called upon  non-Annex I countries to report on their technology needs  and, with MALAYSIA, supported the Secretariat's proposal to  revise the guidelines. SRI LANKA said that SBSTA's actions  should reflect the spirit of language adopted at UNGASS on  transfer of environmentally sound technology. Delegates  also discussed a progress report on the development and  transfer of technologies (FCCC/SBSTA/1997/10); a technical  paper on adaptation technologies (FCCC/TP/1997/3) and a  Climate Technology Initiative (CTI) survey of technology  information centers. The progress report discusses the  technology information needs survey, adaptation technology  and information centres and networks.

JAPAN highlighted recent CTI national and regional  workshops and, with the EU, noted the need to make the best  use of existing institutions and programmes. The EU also  stressed the importance of the technological needs survey  for non-Annex I Parties and urged Annex I Parties to  provide information.

Some developing countries described difficulties in  identifying adaptation technology and responding to  questionnaires and surveys. They said it was difficult to  identify their own technological needs and suggested a  study. INDIA described its recent technological advances,  including electronic networking systems and regional  research centers. MALAYSIA said the Secretariat should  promote decision-making tools and develop a technology  information center.

The US said that technology is key to solving the climate  change threat and creating the right investment environment  to attract financing is critical to resolving the  technology transfer issue.

On 24 October, the Co-Chair of the contact group on  technology transfer reported that the group had not yet  reached agreement.

On 28 October, SBSTA considered draft conclusions on  development and transfer of technology. Under the draft  conclusions, SBSTA: noted the need to accelerate the  process of providing information; urged Parties to provide  comments on (an) international centre(s); and requested SBI  to consider funding options; and agreed to consider at its  ninth session additions or amendments to the revised  guidelines for national communications. Under the draft  decision for COP-3, the COP would, inter alia, request the  Secretariat to consult with the GEF and other international  organizations on their ability to support the work of (an)  international centre(s); request SBI to consider options  for funding (an) international centre(s); and urge Parties  to create an enabling environment to further stimulate  private sector investment in and transfer of  environmentally sound technology.

### CLOSING PLENARY

On 28 October, SBSTA approved the draft report of its  seventh session, as contained in document  FCCC/SBSTA/1997/CRP.4. Two annexes to the report of the  meeting contain the SBSTA's draft decisions for COP-3 and a  list of key policy issues to be addressed in the IPCC TAR.  A number of delegations, including the EU, CANADA, MALAYSIA  and the US, paid tribute to the Chair for his role in  guiding the work of SBSTA.

# A BRIEF ANALYSIS OF AGBM-8 ACT ONE (OR WAS IT JUST A DRESS REHEARSAL?)

Nobody at a theatre performance doubts that all the scenes  played out at the previous evening's showing will be  repeated again down to the last step. Similarly, in  negotiations a well-rehearsed choreography must be allowed  to unfold, one scene after the other, with the inevitable  climax arriving just in time. As surely as air rushes into  a vacuum the players fill their allotted performance time  and follow well-rehearsed scenarios of pre-negotiation,  striking poses, opening lines sometimes accompanied by  great fanfare, confrontation and - in a successful  performance - resolution.

To the surprise of some observers, AGBM-8 was clearly  viewed by the leading players as little more than a  preliminary scene in the endgame. The long-awaited grand  entrance of the US emissions target did not distract other  players from previously rehearsed opening bids on targets  and formulas for quantified emission limits and reductions.  These were followed only by hesitant forays into complex  sub-plots that gave little away.

As one of the main scriptwriters, AGBM Chair Raúl Estrada- Oyuela admitted in closing the meeting that the plot had  bogged down. He pondered the studied pace of UN negotiating  dynamics and wondered aloud whether negotiators could have  arrived at the current point in the process given half the  time. With few results, delegates too clearly knew that  this show must go on. AGBM-8, however, was to do no more  than set the stage for the endgames to be played out in  Kyoto both at a resumed AGBM and at COP-3.

Complexity - a running theme in the climate change  negotiations - has marked the road from COP-1 in Berlin,  where the terms of the AGBM mandate were agreed. This  analysis must therefore confine itself to a limited range  of useful questions that have been discussed with a cross- section of conference participants and observers. They were  asked, firstly, to identify the key issue linkages that  have become apparent now that all the main Parties have  tabled proposals on QELROs, and secondly, to comment on the  state of the negotiations and the prospects for a  resolution of outstanding issues in Kyoto. Tied to the  second question is the 'frantic activity' planned during  the intersessional period as Japan throws itself into the  host's role as honest broker of a deal with which all the  key players can live. Some observers have estimated that  climate change-related bilateral and multilateral meetings  are scheduled to take place somewhere in the world every  day between now and the opening of the COP.

## BERLIN REVUE

The debates at AGBM-8 were framed by both the Mandate  agreed at the COP in 1995 and the founding political  debates. It was agreed in Berlin that the current FCCC  commitments should be strengthened for Annex I Parties.  Industrialized countries would take the lead in elaborating  policies and measures and setting quantified limitation and  emission reduction objectives within specified time-frames.  The shape of the Mandate was determined largely by a  breakthrough in negotiations at COP-1 when a number of the  key developing countries - China, India and Brazil -  supported a statement by the Alliance of Small Island  States declaring the current commitments inadequate and  calling on industrialized countries to address the problems  they had, for the most part, generated. By side-lining the  OPEC group in Berlin, other members of the G-77/CHINA moved  toward a general recognition of the need to address climate  change. However, the price they exacted for supporting the  AOSIS proposals was a very definite refusal to accept any  new commitments for developing countries in the next round  of negotiations, i.e., the AGBM. Part of that deal was an  agreement by the US and Australia to drop their insistence  that developing countries get involved in new commitments.

As AGBM-8 began, US President Bill Clinton included a call  for 'meaningful participation' by developing countries in  the negotiating position he announced in Washington. With  those words, the politics that underpinned agreement back  in 1995 resurfaced, with an insistence on G-77/CHINA  involvement once again linked to the level of ambition  acceptable by the US. There is little doubt that the  reference to meaningful participation is one of the more  flexible elements in Clinton's package. Indeed it did not  go unnoticed that the word 'evolution' did not appear in  the final US statement to the session, despite repeated US  calls in other AGBM sessions to address this idea. AGBM  Chair Estrada held fast to his own view, that the  discussion on developing country commitments may occur at  Kyoto, but not as an element of the protocol. Insofar as  evolution is broached at the COP there is some expectation  that a number of developing countries will be receptive to  a discussion on a schedule if, and only if, they detect  meaningful commitment on QELROs by Annex I countries.

The US position was sufficient to 'trigger' latent  suspicions (viewed as opportunities by others, such as the  OPEC group and the industry lobby) among developing country  Parties. In response, the G-77/China used every opportunity  to distance itself from any attempts to draw developing  countries into agreeing to anything that could be  interpreted as new commitments. Needless to say, there is  no truly common position within a group that straddles  positions ranging from AOSIS to OPEC. Observers expect a  more fragmented response in Kyoto, with elements within the  group prepared to meet the US advances half-way. One avenue  may be Article 10 of Chair Estrada's negotiating text which  provides for voluntary country-specific emission limitation  or reduction commitments by developing countries. Such  countries could also participate in joint implementation,  with technology-transfer spin-offs and a structure that  puts developing countries in the driver's seat to authorize  only those cooperative ventures that meet their economic  and technological objectives. They might even begin to take  part in the early stages of emissions trading with Annex I  countries. The US would find the latter particularly  meaningful in the context of its ambitions for the  emissions trading regime. Another potential avenue for  meeting the US desire to bring the developing countries on  board is FCCC Article 4.1. Developing country opposition on  that score was solid at AGBM-8, and coupled to demands for  financial assistance and technology transfer, but some  observers say they may show more flexibility in Kyoto.

## THE PLOT THICKENS

On the eve of AGBM-8 NGOs organized a workshop for many of  the key participants for preliminary discussion on issues  likely to emerge during negotiations. They accurately  identified three sets of linkages among the issues -  elaborating on 'the tradeoffs and tensions'. These  included:•Possible links between the level of Annex I country  emission stabilization/reduction commitments, the degree of  flexibility in meeting those commitments, and the  opportunities for redistributing commitments; and •Possible links between Annex I country commitments and  Non-Annex I country commitments, within and beyond the  current round of negotiations.

Annex I commitments and flexibility: The connection between  the level of QELROs ambition and the scope for flexibility  in reaching those objectives via joint implementation and  emissions trading is clear, even as final details of  implementation remain unresolved. The debate over  differentiation is similarly enmeshed. One observer  suggested that the US is looking for a surfeit of  flexibility measures in the AGBM outcome, more than it  needs. This may produce an agreement that few people  understand and is even less stringent than it looks.

A great deal is expected to hinge on just how 'hard nosed  the EU is prepared to be.' While privately conceding the  need for eventual compromise, the EU, with broad support  from the G-77/CHINA's strategically parallel reduction  proposal and AOSIS, is determined not to negotiate on the  basis of the current US offer on QELROs, i.e.,  stabilization at 1990 levels in the first target period.  There is considerable European and developing country  determination to get reduction figures. Pressing for  ambitious QELROs to match its own bid, the EU has been  withholding support for emissions trading, borrowing and  banking in an attempt to leverage a more ambitious bid on  QELROs 'headline' targets from the US, insisting that  trading is only warranted if there are stringent targets.  It may be worth noting that the headline targets are  somewhat misleading in any case. One academic study  suggests that there is a 10-20% differential between the  target figures for QELROs and actual domestic carbon  reductions achievable. The other side of this equation,  loopholes in emissions trading, also attracted attention.  NGO observers warned that depending on how initial  baselines and targets are counted, at least one country  could sell emissions that would not represent any actual  GHG reduction.

The endgame, however, is expected to be less about whether  trading is allowed and more about when it starts and what  will be permitted. Similarly there are strategic decisions  to be made on whether emissions trading can begin before or  after a verification period. In return, some observers have  noted, the US may be able to come up with some improvement  and support a modest but symbolically important reduction  target. Some calculations suggest a reduction within the  range proposed by Japan would not add significantly to the  current US burden.

Hopeful commentators have suggested that US reductions -  with an emissions trading regime factored in - may just be  possible. A source close to the US administration's  thinking did not rule out an attempt by President Clinton  to point the finger at the US Senate in the wake of attacks  on his targets, and work for some latitude to improve the  offer. He will want to point to concessions on bringing  developing countries on board at some point and trading.  The EU is supportive of a procedural discussion on the  post-Kyoto developments, and expects this to address new  commitments for all FCCC Parties.

Having embraced the principle of differentiation within  their own group, the EU clearly has nothing in principle  against the idea, but is expected to continue its  opposition to an overall differentiation approach for Annex  I Parties until it is satisfied with the target numbers.  The EU will be among the Parties pressing for negotiations  on the basis of a flat rate reduction target to apply  across the board at the outset in Kyoto. Differentiation,  when it does emerge, is expected to be part of the endgame  as Chair Estrada's last minutes request for differentiation  statistics clearly suggests. In Bonn, leading  'differentiators,' including Australia, Norway, and Japan,  largely refused to move on other issues until the prospects  for a differentiated approach to QELROs become clear.

The perceived difficulty with allowing differentiation  proposals to fly too early is the regressive impact it has  on negotiations: once differentiation takes hold, Parties  tend to seize on the opportunity to embark on special  pleading, citing national circumstances for a 'favorable'  place on the sliding scale. The EU is determined to avoid  this diversion for as long as possible. Their closing  strategy - after a flat rate has been agreed in Kyoto - may  be to concede an element of differentiation within a narrow  range.

The Japanese proposal, combining an overall reduction  target of 5% with scope for differentiation, is likely to  provide the outline of the eventual compromise. Well known  for their aversion to surprises, the Japanese hosts are  thought to have been in close contact with the US while  drawing up their proposal. Together with their own domestic  imperatives there is little doubt that a guiding criteria  for the Japanese offer was also the expectation that the  hosts could broker a deal to bring the US and EU positions  together. Japan's differentiation component paved the way  for a low US target.

Another calculation that could sway the balance is how  other countries would fare under the US proposal, which  includes gases not counted in the EU target. Observers say  the EU's limited response to the US in Bonn may be due in  part to its members' need to run the numbers on the US's  preferred mix. Such evaluations will have an impact on all  Parties' views on reductions, the industrial sectors  affected, and thus the political and economic acceptability  of any combination of targets, gases and flexibility.

## OFF-STAGE ANTICS

Japan embarked on its attempts to secure a compromise  between the EU and the US the moment the AGBM session was  adjourned. The business of the session will continue in an  intense series of bilaterals and multilaterals right up to  COP-3. Members of the US delegation left Bonn to begin a  round of visits to European capitals, Japan's Ambassador  Tanabe took a flight to Rome, and Europe's powerful Troika  group will travel to the US for meetings at the White House  and with a number of influential senators. Britain's deputy  Prime Minister, John Prescott, was reportedly invited to  chair an important meeting hosted by Japan, involving Annex  I and selected developing countries.

By scheduling a final AGBM session on the eve of COP-3,  Chair Estrada has also ensured that he will continue his  key role. At the resumed AGBM, he will preside over the  first discussions on a new compilation text with some  vision of a final compromise on the horizon. Based on that  view, he is expected to structure the negotiations  differently for Kyoto, in his new role as Chair of the  Committee of the Whole at the COP.

A number of Annex I Parties pointed out that success in  Kyoto would be difficult solely on the basis of the  positions set out in the new compilation text. There was a  great deal of uncertainty about the state of negotiations  as Parties departed from the session. Estrada said he would  take the weekend to read the various positions tabled at  the session before reaching any conclusions. It is  understood that the FCCC Secretariat has been asked to  contemplate the possibility that no final agreement will  emerge at COP-3 - although no contingency arrangement has  been put in place.

## DENOUEMENT

Experienced participants in UN negotiations sense that they  have seen this show before - approaching the deadline with  a seemingly impossible workload to execute. AGBM-8 could be  compared to a complex piece of improvised theatre where the  lead players have to imagine a number of final scenes  before they receive the script for scene one. A good deal  of the detail was tackled in Bonn, however outstanding key  political decisions on targets, timetables and formulas for  possible differentiation held up any significant change or  finalizing of the Chair's negotiating text.

Deemed one of the most important environment and  development negotiations in the last ten years, the outcome  of the AGBM will become an important indicator of the  current state of political will to confront the bigger  issues that have driven the FCCC since its inception in  1992. The Alliance of Small Island States raised one of  those issues at the closing session Friday, when the Samoan  Ambassador reminded Parties of the ethical dimension and  pleaded with colleagues not to sacrifice the vulnerable to  profit a few. Another participant has pointed out that a  weak result in Kyoto with high flexibility and a low target  would fail to send a sufficient signal regarding the need  to tackle lifestyle change, especially in North America.  Indeed, the US effort to gain acceptance of its proposal  will demand the ultimate hard sell.

An outcome that permits business as usual and absolves the  social development model embraced by the leading  industrialized country in the world will undermine a key  requirement for sustainable development - the placing of a  large question mark over the viability of an unconstrained  consumer culture celebrated in the American dream life.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR BEFORE COP-3

### TRAINING WORKSHOP ON PREPARING IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES

A  Training Workshop on Preparing National Implementation  Strategies will be held in Bolivia from 5-7 November 1997.  For more information contact Stephen Gold, CC:TRAIN; tel:  +41-22-733-1383; fax: +41-22-733-1383; e-mail:  sgold.unitar@unep.ch

### US NATIONAL CLIMATE CHANGE WORKSHOPS

The National Workshop  on Climate Change Impacts will be held from 10-12 November  1997 in Washington, DC. For information contact the USGCRP  Coordination Office; fax: +1-202-358-4103; e-mail:  regional.workshops@usgcrp.gov; Internet:  http://www.usgcrp.gov/usgcrp/ipccrev7.html.

### MONTREAL PROTOCOL

The Scientific Assessment Panel Meeting  will be held from 12-15 November 1997 in Washington DC. For  more information, contact the Convention Secretariat in  Nairobi, Kenya: +254-2-62-1234/62-3851; fax +254-2-52-1930;  e-mail: ozoneinfo@unep.org; Internet:  http://www.unep.org/unep/secretar/ozone/htm.

### SCIENTISTS FOR GLOBAL RESPONSIBILITY CONFERENCE

This  conference, entitled 'Sharing the Responsibility' will be  held on Saturday, 15 November 1997 at the Mary Ward House  in London. Workshops will focus on 'Climate Change - The  Track to Kyoto,' 'Non-Lethal Weapons - The Revolution in  Flexible Tools of Political Control,' and SGR and  Grassroots Activity. The conference will feature a live  audio/visual link to 'The Climate Train' en-route to Kyoto.  For more information contact Scientists For Global  Responsibility, London; tel: +44-181-871 5175; e-mail:  sgr@gn.apc.org; Internet: http://www.gn.apc.org/sgr/ .

### THIRD CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES

The Third Conference of  the Parties (COP-3) to the FCCC is scheduled for 1-10  December 1997 in Kyoto, Japan. A special resumed session of  AGBM-8 will be held on 30 November to resolve outstanding  issues. For all meetings related to the FCCC, contact the  Secretariat in Bonn, Germany; tel: +49-228-815-1000; fax:  +49-228-815-1999; e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.de. Also try  the FCCC home page at http://www.unfccc.de and UNEP's  Information Unit for Conventions at  http://www.unep.ch/iuc.html.