---
title: "UNFCCC COP-9 HIGHLIGHTS"
id: enb12230e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12230e
date: 
abstract: "On Thursday, the second and third high-level round-table  discussions took place. Ministers and heads of delegation  addressed 'technology, including technology use and development  and transfer of technologies' and 'assessment of progress at the  national, regional and international levels to fulfill the promise  and objective enshrined in the climate change agreements,  including the scientific, information, policy and financial  aspects.' Consultations undertaken on behalf of COP-9 President  Persányi on the Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF) continued  throughout the day."
---

# HIGH-LEVEL SEGMENT

### ROUND TABLE II - 'TECHNOLOGY, INCLUDING TECHNOLOGY USE AND  DEVELOPMENT AND TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGIES

COP-9 President  Persányi opened the second round-table discussion, co-chaired by  Paula Dobriansky, Under-Secretary for Global Affairs, US, and  Mohammed Valli Moosa, Minister of Environmental Affairs and  Tourism, South Africa. Co-Chair Dobriansky raised questions on  promoting access to technology in developing countries, and  harnessing the private sector in advancing clean technology. Co- Chair Moosa stressed a focus on actions that can already be taken.  He proposed drawing up an inventory of existing technologies, and  questioned the use of discussing the matter without engaging the  private sector.

In the first part of the round-table discussions, Parties  addressed facilitating technology innovation, development and  diffusion for mitigation and adaptation in the context of  sustainable development. IRELAND, for the EU, stressed the  importance of decoupling economic growth and emissions, and said  renewables are a priority. He encouraged other governments to  adopt similar approaches to the EU Emissions Trading Scheme, and  noted that technology transfer can also occur on South-South and  South-North bases. BURUNDI expressed concern over access to data  from developed countries, and noted the lack of capacity in poor  countries to predict local climate impacts. ICELAND called for  vision, leadership and partnership, and for engaging the business  community. GERMANY stressed the importance of existing clean  technologies in establishing the infrastructure necessary for  developing future clean technologies. SAUDI ARABIA, with OMAN,  pointed to carbon sequestration as an option to offset emissions  from fossil fuel use. INDIA expressed concern that the only  concrete outcome of calls for technology transfer is TT:CLEAR. He  said technology transfer should not be a strictly commercial  consideration, but rather requires policy frameworks. TUVALU  stressed appropriate technologies, and RWANDA said donors must  address the need for poverty reduction when transferring  technologies. The INDIGENOUS PEOPLES' ORGANIZATIONS called for  greater participation and securing indigenous peoples' prior  informed consent when undertaking action.

SURINAME underlined the need to transfer sustainable development  technologies, building capacity and addressing recipient country  needs. NEPAL and CANADA advocated using a range of technologies.  SWEDEN said policy-makers should focus on equity issues and  modalities for the adoption of technologies at local levels. PERU  noted the need for effective international and domestic programmes  and infrastructures. PANAMA underscored the need to develop  technologies to 'clean the atmosphere,' and SLOVENIA urged the  development of new technologies to mitigate climate change. CHAD  requested a list of the technologies that have been transferred to  developing countries. SPAIN urged the establishment of  institutional frameworks to facilitate investment by the private  sector in projects that promote sustainable development.

In the second part of the discussions, Parties spoke on  development assistance, research, technology development  cooperation, partnerships, capacity building, financing and  enabling environments. MALAWI said commitments should be  translated into concrete actions including technology transfer and  poverty alleviation. The REPUBLIC OF KOREA, for the Environmental  Integrity Group, emphasized the importance of publicly funded  technologies and support to the private sector. CUBA stressed the  need to consider economic and social contexts when transferring  technology. KUWAIT highlighted the value of developing  technologies that capture carbon dioxide. SENEGAL emphasized the  need for private sector engagement. BELGIUM highlighted the need  to focus on clean energy and reducing emissions, not end-of-pipe  solutions. In response to Belgium, SAUDI ARABIA said the UNFCCC's  aim is not to reduce oil dependency. The UK stressed the need for  the development of low carbon technologies, immediate use of  existing technologies, and clean development trajectories. The  G-77/CHINA called for effective support for technology transfer in  non-Annex I Parties and research to encourage local-level capacity  building. MADAGASCAR called on Annex I Parties to fulfill their  obligations. The UKRAINE said EITs could reduce emissions through  using the latest technologies and renewables.

In the third part of the round-table, Parties discussed private  sector involvement, market mechanisms, and public-private  partnerships. ITALY presented data on world energy demand, and  concluded that electricity production in developing countries is  both the biggest challenge and opportunity for the dissemination  of renewables. MALAYSIA noted the importance of tax incentives.  BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY ORGANIZATIONS urged governments to provide  enabling frameworks, and said that non-commercial investments are  needed for long-term commitment. The US emphasized public-private  partnerships and noted national programmes on carbon  sequestration, hydrogen and nuclear energy. GHANA said technology  transfer must include know-how and human-resource development.  Noting that the Protocol is the only viable option, JAPAN stressed  developing common rules to apply to all countries. In response to  Co-Chair Moosa's request to comment on carbon sequestration,  NORWAY highlighted successes in re-injecting carbon dioxide into  the continental shelf. CHILE underscored the role played by market  conditions in ensuring cleaner technology, particularly in  transportation. The GAMBIA underlined the need for appropriate  technologies, capacity building, and enhanced international  cooperation. MOZAMBIQUE said LDCs with limited private sectors  need capacity building to participate in the technology-transfer  process.

Co-Chair Dobriansky reviewed the comments, noting a focus on,  inter alia,sustainable development, adaptation, the roles of the  public and private sectors, and the roles of new and existing  technologies. Co-Chair Moosa identified a focus on future  technologies, the need to develop advanced technologies and  ensuring that present and existing technologies are put to maximum  use.

### ROUND TABLE III - 'ASSESSMENT OF PROGRESS AT THE NATIONAL,  REGIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL LEVELS

The final round-table was co- chaired by Fernando Tudela Abad, Chief of Staff of the Secretariat  for Environment, Natural Resources and Fisheries, Mexico, and  Jürgen Trittin, Minister for the Environment, Nature Conservation  and Nuclear Safety, Germany, on 'assessment of progress at the  national, regional and international levels to fulfill the promise  and objective enshrined in the climate change agreements,  including the scientific, information, policy and financial  aspects.' Co-Chair Tudela Abad said the CDM faces challenges  arising from the delay in the Protocol's entry into force, limited  markets, and 'crippling' transaction costs. Co-Chair Trittin said  the UNFCCC obliges all Parties to tackle climate change, and  questioned the extent to which developed countries have taken the  lead in combating climate change and addressing adverse effects.

In the first part of the round-table, Parties discussed lessons  learned from local and national climate change measures. The CZECH  REPUBLIC said cooperation should be based on clear rules. TANZANIA  said support for adaptation measures in LDCs is a moral  requirement. The EUROPEAN COMMISSION said effective climate change  measures require political will, and stressed that emissions can  be reduced at low costs, using existing technologies. YEMEN  expressed concern at the reluctance of Annex I Parties to take  necessary actions to address climate change. The NETHERLANDS said  it will continue to implement its Protocol obligations in the  absence of the Russian Federation's ratification. KAZAKHSTAN said  it is preparing procedures for the Protocol's ratification. IRAN  underscored the benefits of economic diversification and stressed  Parties' common but differentiated responsibilities. GREECE  stressed the importance of scientific data for sound climate  change policies. COSTA RICA said future generations will judge the  present generation based on whether the Protocol is ratified.  YEMEN, COSTA RICA, PERU and the PHILIPPINES urged Parties who have  not yet done so to ratify the Protocol. AZERBAIJAN emphasized the  need for technology transfer and carbon sequestration projects.  TURKEY announced its accession to the UNFCCC.

In the second part of the round-table, Parties discussed lessons  learned from implementation of regional and international climate  change measures. NORWAY observed recognition in the business and  finance communities of the move toward a carbon-constrained world.  COLOMBIA and others shared experiences on the CDM. The MALDIVES  and MAURITIUS highlighted the vulnerability of SIDS, and called  for technology transfer to address adaptation needs. The US said  there are many types of international cooperation, and stressed  the role of international technology partnerships. Regarding  regional cooperation, COLOMBIA stressed the important role of  regional institutions and the need to strengthen regional  development banks. SWEDEN highlighted the value of EU Emissions  Trading Scheme. BANGLADESH emphasized the need for regional  capacity-building activities. NAMIBIA said the SCCF must be  operationalized to justify continued expenditures on UNFCCC- related work to constituencies of LDCs. NIGERIA said the SCCF  negotiations have re-opened agreements reached at previous COP  sessions.

In the third part of the round-table, Parties discussed the  assessment of progress and practical steps for future actions,  focusing in particular on cooperation and cross-sectoral  partnerships to promote action on climate change. The PHILIPPINES  said the current pace of negotiations is 'grossly inadequate.' The  G-77/CHINA called on developed countries to fulfill their  greenhouse gas emissions reduction commitments and limit adverse  effects. The RUSSIAN FEDERATION urged clear procedures for the  CDM, operationalization of JI, and simplification of existing  Protocol procedures. BRAZIL said progress in implementing the  Protocol is hindered by uncertainty of its entry into force.  TUVALU noted that progress made so far does not reflect the  seriousness of climate change and emphasized that real action is  needed. The REPUBLIC OF KOREA stressed that state-of-the-art  technology is necessary for decoupling economic growth from  greenhouse gas emissions. BHUTAN expressed concern that the LDC  Fund will be inaccessible to most LDCs. OMAN, and others, urged  Annex I Parties to provide greater technical and financial  assistance to developing countries. AUSTRALIA said it will strive  to meet its Protocol targets. KIRIBATI called for a framework that  ensures that vulnerable countries have access to financing to  address the adverse affects of climate change. CUBA noted the  importance of accessing technologies and knowledge. POLAND  stressed the need to balance mitigation and adaptation measures.

In his conclusion, Co-Chair Trittin stressed collaboration between  Parties to limit the increase in global temperature to below two  degrees Celsius this century. Co-Chair Tudela Abad said many  developing countries have gone beyond their obligations under the  UNFCCC and said the only option now is to 'turn off the heat.' In closing, President Persányi noted Argentina's offer to host  COP-10 and said several Parties had proposed changing the date of  COP-10. He requested Parties to consult on this matter before  Friday's bureau meeting and COP Plenary.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

With one day of COP-9 remaining, some observers have remarked on  the growing divisions in the negotiating positions of regional  groups and the amount of time spent coordinating and building  consensus within groups. One delegate observed that if the groups  are unable to agree on their negotiating positions, then the  possibility of reaching consensus in the final COP Plenary, which  will deal with outstanding decisions on financing, might be in  jeopardy. Despite consensus-building attempts by President  Persányi, negotiations on the SCCF continued late into the night  Thursday, with disagreement and entrenched positions defining the  discussions. On the LDC Fund, another observer suggested that  President Persányi should be prepared for a 'highly charged'  meeting with LDC ministers on Friday, to resolve growing  resentment between LDCs and some developed countries over inaction  and indecision on the necessary steps to implement NAPAs.

On another note, while the environmental NGOs hosted a birthday  party for the Protocol, several observers were wondering whether  the 120 Parties to the Protocol would initiate a 'Friends of the  Protocol' meeting. Some have suggested that such an initiative  would not be missed by Russia's President Putin who would not want  to be an 'outsider' to this important leadership initiative.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### COP PLENARY

The COP Plenary is scheduled to meet at 10:00 am and  again at 3:00 pm to finalize its work and adopt decisions.