---
title: "SUMMARY OF THE WORKSHOP ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE FIVE-YEAR PROGRAMME OF WORK ON IMPACTS, VULNERABILITY AND ADAPTATION: 17-19 OCTOBER 2005"
id: enb12279e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12279e
date: 2005-10-19
abstract: "The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)  informal workshop on the development of the five-year programme of  work on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation was held from 17-19  October 2005, at the Wissenschaftszentrum in Bonn, Germany. More  than fifty participants from Annex I and non-Annex I parties, as  well as non-governmental organizations, were in attendance. The  purpose of the workshop was to develop common ground and  understanding on the possible content, structure, process for  implementation and modalities of the programme of work."
---

The workshop was convened following a request from the UNFCCC's  Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) at  its twenty-second session in May 2005, for the UNFCCC Secretariat  to organize, under the guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA, an  informal workshop to facilitate the development of the programme  of work on adaptation before SBSTA 23, with a view to recommending  a decision to COP 11 in November/December 2005.

The workshop presented an opportunity for parties to exchange  views on what the content of the SBSTA five-year programme of work  might be. Discussion centered on four possible thematic or action  areas identified in decision 1/CP.10, namely: methodologies, data  and modelling; vulnerability assessments; adaptation planning,  measures and actions; and integration into sustainable  development. Options for the process of implementation and  modalities of the programme of work were also addressed. As a  basis for discussion, participants used first a discussion paper  prepared by the Secretariat based on submissions by parties and  discussions at the in-session workshop and at the contact group on  adaptation at SBSTA 22, and then an informal summary of the  discussion at the workshop prepared by the Co-Chairs.

The agenda of the workshop was fully dedicated to a discussion of  the programme of work. On Monday and Tuesday, 17-18 October,  participants exchanged general comments and addressed the possible  thematic areas identified in decision 1/CP.10 and elaborated upon  in the discussion paper. On Tuesday afternoon and Wednesday, 19  October, participants turned their attention to the Co-Chairs'  informal summary of the discussion. At the end of the meeting, the  Co-Chairs presented a revised version of the informal summary of  the discussion incorporating comments from the workshop. This  revised summary, which is an advance version of the SBSTA Chair's  summary of the workshop, was not open for comments but will be  posted on the UNFCCC website within a period of two weeks.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE UNFCCC AND ADAPTATION

Climate change is considered to be one of the most serious threats  to sustainable development, with adverse impacts expected on the  environment, human health, food security, economic activity and  physical infrastructure. Global climate varies naturally but  scientists agree that rising concentrations of anthropogenic  greenhouse gases in the Earth's atmosphere are leading to changes  in the climate. According to the Intergovernmental Panel on  Climate Change (IPCC), the effects of climate change have already  been observed, and scientific findings indicate that precautionary  and prompt action is necessary.

The international political response to climate change began with  the adoption of the UNFCCC in 1992. The UNFCCC sets out a  framework for action aimed at stabilizing atmospheric  concentrations of greenhouse gases in order to avoid 'dangerous  anthropogenic interference' with the climate system. Controlled  gases include methane, nitrous oxide and, in particular, carbon  dioxide. The UNFCCC entered into force on 21 March 1994, and now  has 189 parties. The parties to the UNFCCC typically convene once  a year in a Conference of the Parties (COP), and twice a year in  meetings of its subsidiary bodies.

### THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

In December 1997, delegates at COP 3 in Kyoto,  Japan, agreed to a protocol to the UNFCCC that commits developed  countries and countries making the transition to a market economy  to achieve quantified emissions reduction targets. These  countries, known under the UNFCCC as Annex I parties, agreed to  reduce their overall emissions of six greenhouse gases by an  average of 5.2% below 1990 levels between 2008-2012 (the first  commitment period), with specific targets varying from country to  country. The Protocol also establishes three flexible mechanisms  to assist Annex I parties in meeting their national targets cost- effectively: an emissions trading system; joint implementation of  emissions-reduction projects between Annex I parties; and the  Clean Development Mechanism, which allows for projects to be  implemented in non-Annex I parties. To date, 156 parties have  ratified the Protocol, including 37 Annex I parties, representing  61.6% of 1990 Annex I greenhouse gas emissions, meeting the  requirements for entry into force of the Protocol, which took  place on 16 February 2005. The first Meeting of Parties to the  Kyoto Protocol (COP/MOP 1) will take place in conjunction with COP  11 in Montreal, Canada, from 28 November - 9 December 2005.

### ADAPTATION

Adaptation is a cross-cutting theme of the UNFCCC and  is referred to in different articles. In particular, Convention  Article 4.1 states that parties shall 'formulate, implement,  publish and regularly update national and, where appropriate,  regional programmes containing measures to facilitate adequate  adaptation to climate change,' and 'cooperate in preparing for  adaptation to the impacts of climate change.' Convention Article  4.4 states that developed country parties shall 'assist the  developing country parties that are particularly vulnerable to the  adverse effects of climate change in meeting costs of adaptation  to those adverse effects.' While COP 1 in 1995 addressed funding  for adaptation (decision 11/CP.1), it was not until the adoption  of the Marrakesh Accords in 2001 that adaptation began to be more  widely seen as a prominent area for action, as set out in decision  5/CP.7 (adverse effects of climate change).

The actual process for the development of a structured programme  of work on adaptation began in Milan at COP 9 in December 2003,  following the conclusion of consideration of the Third Assessment  Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). In  what is sometimes referred to as the 'Milan process on  adaptation,' COP 9 requested the SBSTA to initiate work on  scientific, technical and socioeconomic aspects of, and  vulnerability and adaptation to, climate change (decision  10/CP.9). SBSTA conducted one pre-sessional workshop on this  matter at SBSTA 19 in December 2003, and two in-session workshops  at SBSTA 20 and 21.

With decision 1/CP.10 (Buenos Aires Programme of Work on  Adaptation and Response Measures), parties reached a new milestone  in terms of work on adaptation, as the COP called for SBSTA to  develop a structured five-year programme of work on the  scientific, technical and socioeconomic aspects, vulnerability and  adaptation to climate change. This request specified four general  issues or thematic areas to be addressed by the programme of work:  methodologies, data and modelling; vulnerability assessments;  adaptation planning, measures and actions; and integration into  sustainable development, in the context of the terms of reference  of the SBSTA as referred to in Convention Article 9. The COP also  invited parties to submit their views on the programme of work and  its implementation.

Parties initiated deliberations on the programme of work in an  in-session workshop at SBSTA 22 in May 2005. The SBSTA Chair  prepared a summary of this workshop containing possible elements  of the programme of work to serve as the basis for further  discussions. These were taken up by a contact group, which  continued deliberations on the objective, scope of work, process,  structure, activities, modalities and review of the programme of  work. The contact group met six times and held numerous informal  consultations. However, the programme of work could not be  completed at SBSTA 22, and the text was fully bracketed. In its  conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2005/4), SBSTA agreed to further consider  and elaborate at SBSTA 23 the draft COP decision and its draft  annex containing the possible elements of the programme of work,  with a view to forwarding a draft decision for adoption at COP 11.  To facilitate this, SBSTA also agreed to hold an informal workshop  under the guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA before SBSTA 23,  meeting in conjunction with COP 11 in Montreal, beginning on 28  November 2005.

# REPORT OF THE WORKSHOP

Halldór Thorgeirsson, SBSTA Coordinator, UNFCCC Secretariat,  welcomed participants and announced with sadness the passing away  of Joke Waller-Hunter, UNFCCC Executive Secretary, on Saturday,  14 October 2005. He recalled her work, and noted her down-to-earth,  straightforward personality and the passion with which she worked,  emphasizing her sincere commitment to the principles of the UNFCCC  and the Kyoto Protocol. Thorgeirsson also noted that Waller-Hunter  was particularly interested in developing a strategic approach to  adaptation. Participants observed a minute of silence.

SBSTA Chair Abdullatif Salem Benrageb (Libya) reiterated the  excellent work done by Waller-Hunter as UNFCCC Executive Secretary  and the many good things she left behind. Regarding the workshop,  he said that despite common agreement on the urgency of developing  the programme of work and a lack of fundamental differences of  opinion on its general content, there is no common vision on what  the focus and actions of the programme of work should be, and that  to address this, the workshop agenda was fully dedicated to a  discussion of these issues. Benrageb pointed to high-level  meetings since SBSTA 22 that addressed the importance of  adaptation and risk management, including the G8 Gleneagles Summit  and the UN World Summit, and expressed hope that the programme of  work would be ready for adoption at COP 11. He asked Kishan  Kumarsingh (Trinidad and Tobago) and Helen Plume (New Zealand) to  co-chair the workshop.

Thorgeirsson then presented a discussion paper prepared by the  Secretariat, based on submissions by parties and the in-session  workshop and discussions at SBSTA 22, and which includes options  for the possible content, structure, thematic areas, process of  implementation, and modalities of the programme of work. He  identified the broad requirements that should guide the programme,  namely: responsiveness, inclusiveness, continuity, practicality,  action-oriented, and consistency with SBSTA's mandate. Noting that  all that needs to be done cannot be covered by SBSTA in five  years, he suggested a phased 'two-line' approach for  implementation of the programme of work, with a first line of  initial actions that could be launched immediately, and a  parallel, stocktaking activity for which actions would be defined  later. He proposed focusing discussion on the possible content of  the programme of work and on the process of implementation and  modalities that may be used.

In the initial round of general comments, participants commended  the paper as a basis for discussions, and highlighted the need to  focus on the desirable outcome of the five-year programme of work,  noting, inter alia, the importance of stocktaking, flexibility,  and balance.

Canada, supported by South Africa, Austria and many others, urged  taking a broad approach so that the programme of work serves as a  catalyst for other actions outside of SBSTA. The Cook Islands  underscored the importance of several courses of action addressing  the urgent needs of the most vulnerable countries, and with  Bangladesh and others, called for an ad hoc expert group on  adaptation. Austria noted the work of the Convention of Biological  Diversity (CBD) and of the Ad-Hoc Technical Expert Group on  Biological Diversity and Climate Change, and Peru drew attention  to the upcoming IPCC Fourth Assessment Report (4AR). Spain  highlighted capacity building and dissemination of knowledge as  the general objectives of the programme of work.

Noting the increase in hurricane intensity, Jamaica stressed  attending to the needs of the most vulnerable countries, while  Ukraine emphasized the needs of all countries.

Japan noted the limited time before COP 11 and, with China, urged  prioritizing actions relating to the programme of work. Kenya drew  attention to the work on adaptation done by the Consultative Group  of Experts on National Communications from parties not included in  Annex I to the Convention (CGE). Croatia, with others, underscored  the need to be proactive, while India and the Netherlands  emphasized engaging governments and NGOs working at the local level.

# POSSIBLE CONTENT, PROCESS AND MODALITIES OF THE PROGRAMME OF WORK

Co-Chair Plume invited general comments on the possible thematic  areas of the programme of work elaborated upon in the paper  prepared by the Secretariat. The US underscored the importance of  discussing the connection between vulnerability, impacts and  adaptation, while the UK called for achieving a balance between  the three elements. The UK also suggested taking into account  already existing information. Poland highlighted that  vulnerability depends largely on local and national conditions,  which limits the extent to which SBSTA can identify vulnerability,  and Brazil noted that many actions are likely to extend beyond the  five-year programme of work. China highlighted the inadequate  technical capacity in many developing countries to undertake  certain activities.

### METHODOLOGIES, DATA AND MODELLING

Co-Chair Plume then invited a  discussion on methodologies, data and modelling. Highlighting the  UNFCCC's Compendium of methods and tools to evaluate impacts of,  and vulnerability and adaptation to, climate change (adaptation  Compendium), the UK stressed the need to seek updates from parties  on the use of the adaptation Compendium and the development of new  methods. Canada emphasized the need to consider the work of bodies  other than the UNFCCC on adaptation. The Cook Islands noted the  role of learning by doing and using multiple methodologies for  pursuing adaptation. Brazil outlined its regional climate  modelling capacities, while Senegal, with Bangladesh, stressed the  need to make global climate models more user-friendly and locally  applicable. Responding to Co-Chair Plume's questions regarding  South-South cooperation, Brazil elaborated on the need for  building capacity in other South American countries to be able to  use the analyses of the Brazilian regional climate model.

Responding to comments on the resolution of models, the US urged  avoiding discussion of precise details and instead developing  notional categories. SBSTA Chair Benrageb recalled SBSTA's  mandate, and reminded participants that this is not a negotiating  session but that the goal of the workshop is to lay the groundwork  for the programme of work.

On a call from Bangladesh to downscale models, Austria warned  against taking a narrow approach, noting that shortcomings exist  in various areas, such as lack of data or capacity, and not just  in the lack of available models. The Cook Islands proposed to  include resilience indicators and pointed to other processes  where adaptation needs have been identified. She also called for  making the thematic areas more action oriented. Switzerland  suggested ordering items in the proposed thematic areas before  considering further terms of reference. Brazil stressed  identifying pre-existing capacities for adaptation in countries  and institutions.

Co-Chair Kumarsingh underscored the importance of the two-line  approach and of identifying actions rather than defining the exact  objectives and making them fit a thematic area. Bangladesh  highlighted a targeted time-bound approach for each activity.  Finland added that it would be useful to make the distinction  between partners and clients in adaptation activities. Canada,  followed by the US and Australia, suggested a strategic approach  to developing the programme of work. The US, along with Finland  and others, suggested that the discussion was being hamstrung by  the four categories in the discussion paper. She highlighted that  methodologies, data and modelling is a crosscutting area that runs  throughout the other thematic areas.

Co-Chair Kumarsingh proposed, and participants agreed, to make the  methodologies, data and modelling thematic area a cross-cutting  issue running throughout the other thematic areas. The UK called  for distinguishing the work to be undertaken at the Convention and  at the national level. Co-Chair Kumarsingh said that the goal of  the workshop was to develop a common understanding that would  allow the completion of the decision text. Uzbekistan stressed the  urgency to provide decision makers with advice on integrating  adaptation into development.

Responding to various comments on the level of detail and  criteria, Thorgeirsson stressed the need to prioritize, and  cautioned against a programme of work that would seem overly  complex or vague to ministers attending COP 11, noting that some  of the ministers are very concerned about the impacts of climate  change.

### VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENTS

On vulnerability assessments,  Switzerland stressed the need to benefit from already existing  information sources. The Netherlands noted the importance of  multidisciplinary efforts involving people working in alternative  sectors as well as decision makers for conducting vulnerability  and impact assessments. The US said that stocktaking might be more  important in some areas than others, and supported by the UK,  suggested looking at regional impacts rather than impacts on  specific parties. The UK, supported by Spain and others, said that  one could capture the information on vulnerability through a  broadly-structured questionnaire that would address methodological  issues and costs of implementation across sectors. Australia noted  the need to introduce action-oriented verbs in the proposed  sub-themes under the thematic areas. Peru suggested including both  social and economic impacts as a necessary component of  vulnerability assessments. Bangladesh highlighted the role of the  SBSTA in providing tools to examine economic impacts of climate  change, and Jamaica noted that many of the tools available are  more suitable for developed countries than for developing ones.

### ADAPTATION PLANNING, MEASURES AND ACTIONS

On Tuesday, 18 October,  participants addressed adaptation planning, measures and actions.  Austria, supported by Poland, emphasized the importance of  including adaptation in national development strategies. The UK  proposed collecting information on country experiences. He drew  attention to the UNFCCC seminar on the development and transfer of  environmentally sound technologies for adaptation held in Trinidad  and Tobago in June 2005, and other work within the Convention.  Senegal stressed the importance of technology transfer and, with  Cuba, noted the need for climate predictions for developing  countries, given increased climate variability. Australia,  supported by the US, proposed combining the list of actions on  this thematic area under three headings: collection and analysis  of data, monitoring and evaluation; promotion and development of  analytical tools and technology transfer; and assessment processes  related to decision-making. He added that agreement on long term  targets for adaptation is a political decision to be taken at the  national level and should be addressed elsewhere. Switzerland  emphasized bottom-up approaches that take into account national  experiences with adaptation in different sectors, both in terms of  successes and gaps identified in the national communications. He  also noted the importance of analyses of adaptation costs,  'solidarity mechanisms' and cooperation, and clear governance.

Austria, supported by Japan, and opposed by China, Brazil,  Switzerland and Peru, suggested making a link between long-term  targets for adaptation and mitigation. China, Brazil and others  stressed the need to avoid making the programme of work more  complex than necessary by linking adaptation to mitigation. Japan,  supported by Finland, emphasized that linking adaptation and  mitigation would be a useful addition to cost-benefit analyses of  adaptation. He also noted that good vulnerability assessments are  a prerequisite for adaptation planning. SBSTA Chair Benrageb  emphasized the need to build capacity given the differential  capabilities of countries to undertake adaptation.

Co-Chair Plume cautioned against an oversimplification of the  thematic areas identified in the discussion paper and the absence  of reference to short term targets. The Philippines underscored  strengthening data collection and recovery mechanisms, and the  Russian Federation proposed making reference not only to data  access but also data preparation. India noted that adaptation  planning should be included in the planning of infrastructure  development projects, and Poland proposed including social aspects  of adaptation. Drawing attention to the actions listed in decision  1/CP.10, the US, supported by Finland, highlighted the need for  provision of scientific advice. The UK noted the absence of  publications on national adaptation strategies and, with Cuba and  others, stressed the link between adaptation planning and  integration into sustainable development. Canada noted that  adaptive capacity naturally links vulnerability, impacts and  adaptation, and cautioned against losing the focus on adaptation  when addressing sustainable development as a cross-cutting issue.  Supported by the Philippines and others, she suggested including  chapeau headings with broad action plans, such as monitoring and  evaluation, under which specific actions could be identified. The  Netherlands stressed considering the long-term perspective and  said that the programme of work should be a country-driven  exercise. Spain called for specific reference to participatory  processes and emphasized the need to identify short-term results  as part of the programme of work.

Australia, with Sudan and others, called for enhancing capacities  at the local level, and Saudi Arabia emphasized the need for an  assistance mechanism. Noting that communication is a key component  of adaptation, he proposed the early establishment of a website  for information dissemination, and added that adaptation implies a  lifestyle change and that a long- term perspective is critical.  Switzerland proposed compiling existing material on adaptation  under National Adaptation Plans for Action and National  Communications. Ukraine referred to the importance of indicators  for adaptation.

### INTEGRATION INTO SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

On integrating  adaptation into sustainable development, Finland emphasized the  importance of partnerships, including with local governments.  Maldives, supporting Kenya and Bangladesh, noted its readiness to  move forward towards implementation of a number of adaptation  activities. Senegal, supported by the Cook Islands, stressed the  importance of examining how adaptation activities fit into a  larger sustainable development agenda. The Cook Islands urged  taking into account outputs and short term objectives, and  highlighted impacts of adaptation on sustainable development. With  Canada, she suggested that adaptation success stories can only  emerge from demonstration projects. Samoa emphasized the need to  address the balance between vulnerability, adaptation and impacts,  and addressing actual adaptation activities over stocktaking.  Switzerland cautioned against using general tools and practices  for identifying synergies between climate change and sustainable  development. He also noted that vulnerability assessments are  country-dependent and that risk assessment involves value  judgments. With others, he identified the need to provide both  policymakers and stakeholders with better information to enhance  resilience of areas such as economic sectors. The UK highlighted  the need to create modalities for quantifying climate risks as  they apply to key sectors and to conduct vulnerability  assessments. Japan emphasized extricating only those issues in  sustainable development that are related to climate change.  Jamaica highlighted that many of the adaptation activities are  becoming increasingly expensive, while Portugal said that  adaptation is both a developed and developing country issue.  Thorgeirsson noted that COP 11 will provide guidance on the  allocation of the new US$100 million funding available through the  Global Environment Facility (GEF) and that the two new Secretariat  programmes - on support to implementation and on adaptation,  science and technology - could be useful to the programme of work.

### PROCESS AND MODALITIES

Noting participants' comments on  stocktaking, exchanging information on best practices and lessons  learned, and the potential creation of an ad hoc expert group,  Co-Chair Plume proposed addressing options for the process of  implementation and modalities of the programme of work. Canada,  with Australia, the US and others, said that modalities would  depend on what actions are adopted. The US noted the usefulness of  workshops, while the UK stressed the need to clearly define the  nature and role of a possible ad hoc expert group. Co-Chair Plume  said that a summary of the discussion would be made available  during the afternoon session.

# CO-CHAIRS' INFORMAL SUMMARY OF THE DISCUSSION

On Tuesday afternoon, Co-Chair Kumarsingh introduced an informal  summary of the workshop discussion on the programme of work, and  asked for general comments.

Several participants proposed using language from Convention  Article 9 (SBSTA), and the UK proposed to address the issue of  consistency with SBSTA's mandate in a chapeau paragraph. On the  expected outcome of the programme of work, the UK, with others,  noted that the intent of the programme of work should be to  enhance capacity to identify, decide on and implement adaptation  actions.

Switzerland suggested giving priority to stocktaking before  proposing specific actions. Co-Chair Kumarsingh asked participants  to focus on possible specific activities under each thematic area.  The US noted that it is important that this process lead to  improvement in the quality of information collected and that there  is a need to identify the target audience before undertaking  activities such as promotion of understanding of climate risks and  vulnerabilities. Australia said that integration of sustainable  development is not a thematic area, and noted that all countries  are vulnerable to climate change. He suggested clarifying the  target audience for improving availability of socioeconomic  information. Peru emphasized that a number of actions pertaining  to capacity building and technical training mentioned in decision  1/CP.10 were not mentioned in the summary of the discussion.  Co-Chair Kumarsingh responded that capacity building is very much  a part of the framework of the programme of work. Samoa noted the  need for making reference to the needs of the most vulnerable  countries, and Bangladesh stressed that socioeconomic information  on vulnerable populations is essential.

SBSTA Chair Benrageb reminded participants of the need for a fair  and balanced proposal that has a good chance of being adopted at  COP 11.

On promoting understanding of climate risks, key vulnerabilities  and thresholds of climate change, Austria, opposed by Brazil and  Peru, proposed including reference to forests. Peru suggested  instead a reference to fragile ecosystems.

Canada, supported by Austria, Sudan and many others, stressed the  need to avoid limiting the programme of work to decision 1/CP.10,  saying that the programme of work should serve as a broad  framework to stimulate investment and work outside the Convention.  In this regard, she mentioned Canada's national government and  indigenous communities, as well as the CGE, as examples of other  processes and communities who are looking for guidance from the  UNFCCC on adaptation. The US, with the Netherlands, called for a  reference to sectors and, on SBSTA's work, she proposed to use  language along the lines that SBSTA 'will explore' the actions  identified in the programme of work, instead of using other verbs  such as 'promote,' 'improve' or 'collect.' Peru, with Saudi Arabia, Norway and several others, proposed  considering integration as a cross-cutting issue, while Portugal  suggested increased reference to synergies. The Netherlands,  supported by Finland, called for adding explicit reference to  local knowledge, while Switzerland preferred reference to local  stakeholders. Norway noted that adaptation should be mainstreamed  into development and this could open new areas of funding. South  Africa disagreed, saying that funding for adaptation projects  should not rely on development funding.

Co-Chair Kumarsingh asked participants to identify the modalities  and time frames of the programme of work. Australia suggested the  use of a compendium or website as a tool for information  dissemination. Switzerland suggested that actions could be  initially defined on an annual or semi-annual basis and  subsequently amended at SBSTA meetings. Responding to  Switzerland's query on the availability of Secretariat resources,  Thorgeirsson noted that the Secretariat's budget was limited and  that the programme of work is SBSTA's responsibility, not the  Secretariat's. He added that most of the adaptation activities  would involve other actors.

Finland stressed the need to identify the form and sources of  information available before deciding on the modality for  information dissemination to users on impacts and vulnerabilities.  Jamaica noted that useful information is included in national  communications and, supported by Kenya, outlined other existing  initiatives, including stakeholder consultations.

Switzerland stressed the need to compile lessons learned before  promoting development and dissemination of methods for impacts and  vulnerability assessments. He stressed that a large amount of  information is available regarding adaptation strategies in the  national communication of Annex I parties. He also said that  institutions such as the Data Distribution Center of the IPCC  could provide information on crosscutting areas for modelling and  that the Secretariat could assist in collecting and making this  information available.

Noting a request in decision 1/CP.10 to organize regional  workshops, Peru offered to host the first one of these workshops.  The US, with Finland, noted that the workshops referred to in  decision 1/CP.10 were already spoken for. Canada said that the  UNFCCC could invite its own bodies, such as the CGE, to conduct  workshops. Responding to a question by the UK on the specific  purpose of the regional workshops, Thorgeirsson said the goal is  to reflect on regional needs and priorities but the programme of  work should make the workshops more targeted. Canada, with Spain,  added that regional workshops might be the best means to share  information, discuss opportunities, and integrate other sectors  and institutions. Croatia added that there is a need for separate  workshops where the climate change specialists can interact with  the relevant sectoral representatives. Austria recommended holding  in-session workshops during SBSTA meetings as a forum for parties  to report on lessons learned on adaptation, while the Cook Islands  highlighted the potential role of intersessional working groups.

Spain proposed that the UNFCCC Secretariat complete and update the  current adaptation Compendium. Switzerland called for specific  time frames, while Japan, supported by the US, noted budget and  other limitations and stressed the need to focus on a five-year  programme of work. The US supported an ad hoc expert group to  start the programme of work.

South Africa, supported by many participants, proposed to have  'landmarks' or deadlines on actions identified to allow feedback  for recommendations and further progress. Thorgeirsson noted that  SBSTA will be considering the IPCC 4AR in 2008 and this would  present a good opportunity to interact with experts. He suggested  that a possible request to the IPCC to report on adaptation issues  should not be restricted to the IPCC 4AR, but also include later  research not covered in the assessment report. Thorgeirsson also  noted that there will be a report by the Global Climate Observing  System on systematic observation at SBSTA 23 in Montreal.

Switzerland called for a strong role of the UNFCCC Secretariat in  the programme of work, particularly in dissemination of  information. Responding to Brazil's question on the Secretariat's  capacity for setting up a clearinghouse for disseminating  information, Thorgeirsson replied that the Secretariat does  possess the requisite technical but not the financial resources.

On Wednesday, 19 October, participants continued discussion of the  Co-Chairs' informal summary of the discussion. On promotion of  development and dissemination of analytical and decision-making  tools, Austria noted the lack of a compilation on such tools, and  said that this is something a possible questionnaire could  address. He also noted the effectiveness of in-session workshops  for sharing experiences. The Cook Islands, supported by Sudan,  stressed the need for rapid vulnerability assessment tools.  Australia, with others, proposed the use of practical, simple  tools to provide guidance on the effectiveness of adaptation  measures, while South Africa stressed the need for evaluation of  the programme of work itself. The Russian Federation and the  Philippines noted the importance of including information on  unusual climate conditions and of engaging country experts for  this purpose.

The UK noted the lack of readily available methodologies to assess  adaptation measures, while Jamaica noted that measures could be  gauged by their effectiveness. Sudan called for some kind of good  practice guidance on adaptation, and with Jamaica and others,  emphasized reference to adaptation planning. Jamaica and others  suggested requesting a special report on adaptation from the IPCC.  Cuba proposed making use of existing information in the national  communications and expert bodies within the Convention, such as  the CGE and the Expert Group on Technology Transfer. The  Philippines, supported by the Cook Islands and Japan, highlighted  the linkages between assessments, adaptation and integration, and  suggested that these should be reflected in a database on  adaptation that should also include useful experiences of  developing countries.

The US proposed stocktaking as an initial action. Noting that  adaptation measures include policies as well as infrastructure,  Australia, supported by the Cook Islands, Saudi Arabia and others,  called for different types of stocktaking.

Highlighting the importance of participatory processes, the Cook  Islands proposed reference to international cooperation 'among  parties and other organizations.' She also noted the need to take  into account local knowledge and to enhance resilience. The  Netherlands emphasized the role of the private sector in  international cooperation and the need to examine and extend the  adaptation agenda to relevant sustainable development  institutions. Bangladesh, with China and Thailand, emphasized the  importance of international cooperation and bilateral  collaboration in capacity building for impact and vulnerability  assessments. Sudan highlighted the need for greater cooperation  between the Convention and multilateral processes, while Brazil  noted the importance of national focal points in promoting  synergies of the programme of work with other multilateral  environmental agreements.

On possible workshops, Finland, supported by the US and Canada,  proposed structuring workshops on adaptation along four themes:  tools and data requirements and availability; critical issues;  monitoring and evaluation tools; and best practices, and the US,  supported by Saudi Arabia, stressed a sectoral approach to the  workshops. The Cook Islands noted the need for flexibility in  structuring the workshops and cautioned against duplication of  work. Thorgeirsson noted the need for guidance on specifying a  target audience for the workshops.

Japan highlighted the benefits of various adaptation actions,  while the UK emphasized the need to bring the users and producers  of climate information together at the regional and national  levels. The US said that an identification of the audience for  actions would help to better define the modalities. Finland noted  the importance of influencing decision-makers, who are the major  audiences of the programme of work. The Philippines supported the  Netherlands in stressing the importance of incorporating the views  of those outside the convention, such as the business sector, and  highlighted some of the country efforts in reinforcing the  relationship of users and producers of information.

### REVISED SUMMARY OF THE DISCUSSION

Co-Chair Kumarsingh then  presented a revised version of the Co-Chairs' informal summary  incorporating the previous discussions. The draft was not open for  comment but was an advance version of what would be presented as  the SBSTA Chair's summary of the workshop discussion.

The informal summary of the discussions states that the programme  of work would consist of three thematic areas, namely: impacts  and vulnerability; adaptation planning, measures and actions; and  integration. Methodologies, data and modelling appear as a  cross-cutting issue. The summary also notes that the expected  outcome of the programme of work is enhanced capacity at multiple  levels to identify and understand impacts and vulnerabilities and  possible adaptation responses, and to enable countries to select  and implement effective and high priority adaptation actions.  The programme of work is also expected to facilitate the  implementation of decision 1/CP.10, where relevant.

The Co-Chairs' summary of the discussion further identifies  sub-themes for each thematic area. On impacts and vulnerability,  it identifies:promoting development and dissemination of impact and  vulnerability assessment tools and methods; improving access to high quality data and information on  current and future climatic variability and extreme events; promoting understanding of climate risks, key vulnerabilities  and thresholds of climate change; improving availability of socioeconomic information on  vulnerable populations and economic sectors and on the economic  impacts of climate change; and collecting, analyzing and disseminating lessons learned.

On adaptation planning, measures and action, the summary of the  discussion identifies:promoting development and dissemination of analytical and  decision-making tools; collecting and disseminating lessons learned from adaptation  strategies; stimulating adaptation research and technology and  dissemination of adaptation solutions and technologies; and promoting international cooperation to assist vulnerable  countries in enhancing their resilience and managing climate  risks, giving priority to the most vulnerable countries.

On integration, the discussion summary identifies enhancing  synergies between actions to build resilience to climate risks  with other sustainable development objectives. Moreover, the  Co-Chairs' summary of the discussion states that: the programme  of work will consist of both short-term specific activities, and  activities requiring additional information before they are  launched; and activities would be guided by the general  requirements of: responsiveness, inclusiveness, continuity,  practicality, and action-orientation. The summary also notes  possible modalities, including workshops, limited ad hoc working  groups of experts, web-based resources, questionnaires, 'targeted  submissions' from parties, and different types of stocktaking.

# CLOSING REMARKS

Along with Co-Chair Plume, Co-Chair Kumarsingh noted the very  constructive discussion in the workshop that would provide  valuable guidance towards a decision in Montreal at COP 11. SBSTA  Chair Benrageb thanked the government of Canada and others who had  provided funding for the informal workshop, the Secretariat, the  Co-Chairs and the participants, and brought the meeting to a close  at 1:11 pm.

# UPCOMING MEETINGS

### WORKSHOP ON INTERNATIONAL POLICY APPROACHES TO ADDRESS THE CLIMATE  CHANGE CHALLENGE

Organized by the International Petroleum  Industry Environmental Conservation Organization (IPIECA) and  China's Office of Global Environmental Affairs, this workshop will  take place from 25-26 October 2005, in Beijing, China. For more  information, contact: IPEICA; tel: +44-020-7633-2388; fax: +44- 020-7633-2389; e-mail: paula.lynch@ipieca.org; internet:  http://www.ipieca.org/downloads/climate_change/beijing2005/beijing _email/ccwg_beijing.html

### CREATING THE CLIMATE FOR CHANGE - THE SECOND SUSTAINABLE ENERGY  FINANCE ROUNDTABLE

This roundtable will take place on 27 October  2005, in New York. This event will follow the UNEP Finance  Initiative Global Roundtable to be held between 26-27 October  2005. For more information, contact: Eric Usher, UNEP Energy  Branch; tel: +33 (0)1-44-37-76-14; e-mail: eric.usher@unep.fr; or  Paul Clements-Hunt, UNEP Finance Initiative; tel: +41 (0)22-917- 8116; e-mail; pch@unep.ch; internet: http://www.sefi-roundtable.org/

### ENERGY SUMMIT IN AFRICA

This conference will take place from  7-9 November 2005, in Dakar, Senegal. The Summit will support the  New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD). For more  information, contact: Jean-Pierre Favennec; tel: +33-1-4752-7116;  e-mail: j-pierre.favennec@ifp.fr; internet:  http://www.gvep.org/content/calendar/detail/9326

### XII WORLD WATER CONGRESS

Organized by the International Water  Resource Association, this conference will be held from 22-25  November 2005, in New Delhi, India. For more information contact:  G.N. Mathur, Adhering Committee of International Water Resources  Association; tel: +91-11-2611-5984; fax: +91-11-2611-6347; e-mail:  info@worldwatercongress.org; internet:  http://wc.worldwatercongress.org:5050/index.jsp

### FIRST MEETING OF PARTIES TO THE KYOTO PROTOCOL AND ELEVENTH  CONFERENCE OF PARTIES TO THE UNFCCC

The first Meeting of Parties  to the Kyoto Protocol (COP/MOP 1) is taking place in conjunction  with COP 11 of the UNFCCC from 28 November to 9 December 2005, in  Montreal, Canada. For more information, contact: UNFCCC  Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail:  secretariat@unfccc.int; internet:  http://unfccc.int/meetings/cop_11/items/3394.php