---
title: "SUMMARY OF THE WORKSHOP ON LAND USE, LAND-USE CHANGE AND FORESTRY: 10-13 JULY 2000"
id: enb12141e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12141e
date: 2000-07-13
abstract: "One hundred twenty-one representatives of governments,  intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental  organizations (NGOs), business and industry groups and  academic institutions attended the workshop on land use,  land-use change and forestry (LULUCF), which met from 10-13  July 2000 at the International Fair Center in Poznañ,  Poland. This workshop was organized by the Secretariat of  the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  (FCCC) in response to a request by the FCCC's Subsidiary  Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) at its  tenth session, held in June 1999. The SBSTA requested that  a workshop be held between SBSTA-12 and the Sixth  Conference of the Parties (COP-6) to analyze the Special  Report on LULUCF prepared by the Intergovernmental Panel on  Climate Change (IPCC). The Special Report provides Parties  with scientific and technical information relating to  LULUCF and relevant articles of the Kyoto Protocol."
---

Workshop participants heard presentations by lead authors  of the Special Report on LULUCF, as well as by Parties,  NGOs, intergovernmental organizations, and business and  industry groups. They also engaged in question-and-answer  sessions on these presentations and in-depth discussions on  key issues raised. The topics addressed during the workshop  were: afforestation, reforestation and deforestation under  Article 3.3 of the Kyoto Protocol; additional human-induced  activities under Article 3.4 of the Protocol; project-based  LULUCF activities; general accounting, verification and  reporting issues; and linkages with other articles of the  Protocol.

Although there was no official outcome document, the  workshop provided a forum to consider in-depth LULUCF  issues in light of the IPCC Special Report. This could  assist Parties in elaborating their positions in  submissions on LULUCF under the Protocol, which are due by  1 August 2000, as requested by COP-5. Both the workshop and  these submissions will provide input for negotiations on  these issues at the thirteenth sessions of the FCCC  subsidiary bodies (SB-13) in September 2000 and at COP-6,  which will be held in The Hague from 13-24 November 2000. A  draft decision on LULUCF under the Protocol is scheduled to  be developed at COP-6 and to be adopted by the Conference  of Parties serving as the first Meeting of the Parties to  the Protocol (COP/MOP-1). The LULUCF workshop was followed  by a field trip programme for participants on 14 and 15  July, including visits to four LULUCF-relevant sites in  Poland.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FCCC AND THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

The FCCC was adopted on 9 May 1992 and opened for signature  at the UN Conference on Environment and Development in June  1992. It entered into force on 21 March 1994, 90 days after  receipt of the 50th ratification. To date, it has received  184 instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or  accession.

### COP-1

The first Conference of the Parties to the FCCC  (COP-1) took place in Berlin from 28 March - 7 April 1995.  In addition to addressing issues related to the future of  the FCCC, delegates reached agreement on the adequacy of  commitments and adopted the 'Berlin Mandate.' Delegates  agreed to establish an open-ended Ad Hoc Group on the  Berlin Mandate (AGBM) to begin a process toward identifying  appropriate action for the period beyond 2000, including  the strengthening of Annex I Parties' (developed country  Parties and Parties with economies in transition)  commitments through the adoption of a protocol or another  legal instrument. COP-1 also requested the Secretariat to  make arrangements for sessions of the Subsidiary Body for  Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) and the  Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI). SBSTA serves as  the link between the information provided by competent  international bodies and the policy-oriented needs of the  COP. SBI was created to develop recommendations to assist  the COP in the review and assessment of FCCC implementation  and in the preparation and implementation of its decisions.

### AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE

The AGBM met eight  times between August 1995 and COP-3 in December 1997.  During the first three sessions, delegates focused on  analyzing and assessing what the possible policies and  measures to strengthen the commitments of Annex I Parties  could be, how Annex I countries might distribute or share  new commitments, and whether commitments should take the  form of an amendment or a protocol. AGBM-4, which coincided  with COP-2 in Geneva in July 1996, completed its analysis  of the likely elements of a protocol. At AGBM-5, in  December 1996, delegates recognized the need to decide  whether to permit Annex I Parties to use mechanisms that  would give them flexibility in meeting their quantified  emissions limitation and reduction objectives (QELROs).

As the protocol was drafted during the sixth and seventh  sessions of the AGBM, in March and August 1997, delegates  streamlined a framework compilation text by merging or  eliminating some overlapping provisions. Much of the  discussion centered on a proposal from the EU for a 15% cut  in a basket of three greenhouse gases by the year 2010  compared to 1990 emissions levels. In October 1997, as  AGBM-8 began, US President Bill Clinton called for  'meaningful participation' by developing countries in the  negotiating position he announced in Washington. In  response, the G-77/China distanced itself from attempts to  draw developing countries into agreeing to new commitments.

### COP-3

The Third Conference of the Parties (COP-3) was held  from 1-11 December 1997 in Kyoto, Japan. Following intense  formal and informal negotiations, Parties to the FCCC  adopted the Kyoto Protocol on 11 December 1997.

In the Protocol, Annex I Parties to the FCCC agreed to  commitments with a view to reducing their overall emissions  of six GHGs by at least 5% below 1990 levels between 2008  and 2012. The Protocol also established emissions trading,  Joint Implementation (JI) between developed countries, and  a Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) to encourage joint  emissions reduction projects between developed and  developing countries. To date, 22 Parties have ratified the  Protocol. The Protocol will enter into force 90 days after  it is ratified by 55 Parties to the FCCC, including Annex I  Parties representing at least 55% of the total carbon  dioxide (CO2) emissions for 1990.

### COP-4

The Fourth Conference of the Parties (COP-4) was  held from 2-13 November 1998 in Buenos Aires, Argentina.  Following high-level closed door negotiations, delegates  adopted the Buenos Aires Plan of Action (BAPA). The BAPA  contains the Parties' resolution to demonstrate substantial  progress on: the financial mechanism; the development and  transfer of technology; the implementation of FCCC Article  4.8 and 4.9, as well as Protocol Articles 2.3 and 3.14  (adverse effects); activities implemented jointly (AIJ);  the mechanisms of the Protocol; and the preparations for  the first Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting  of the Parties to the Protocol (COP/MOP-1).

### COP-5

The Fifth Conference of the Parties met in Bonn,  Germany, from 25 October - 5 November 1999. COP-5 adopted  32 draft decisions and conclusions on, inter alia, the  review of the implementation of commitments and other FCCC  provisions, and preparations for COP/MOP-1.

On LULUCF, COP-5 adopted a draft decision endorsing a work  programme and elements of a decision-making framework to  address the issue with a view to COP-6 recommending that  COP/MOP-1 adopt decisions on Protocol Article 3.3 (net  changes in emissions and removals by sinks from  afforestation, reforestation and deforestation) and 3.4  (additional human-induced activities relating to changes in  emissions and removals). The work programme called for,  inter alia, submissions from Parties by 1 August 2000 that  include views or proposals that address methodologies and  definitions relating to activities under Article 3.3 and  additional human-induced activities to be included under  Article 3.4. In addition, the work programme called on  Annex I Parties to submit preliminary data to establish  levels of carbon stocks in 1990.

### SB-12

The twelfth sessions of the subsidiary bodies (SB- 12) of the FCCC were held from 12-16 June 2000 in Bonn,  Germany, preceded by one week of informal meetings.  Delegates continued to work toward fulfilling the BAPA by  focusing on a range of technical and political issues aimed  at laying the foundation for negotiations on a  comprehensive agreement to be completed at COP-6. They  adopted 21 draft conclusions on various issues, including  policies and measures, LULUCF, guidelines under Articles 5  (methodological issues), 7 (communication of information)  and 8 (review of information) of the Protocol, technology  transfer, and mechanisms. SB-12 also adopted the Report of  the Joint Working Group on Compliance.

Regarding LULUCF, participants at SB-12 received an in- depth briefing on the new Special Report of the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), which had  been developed following a request at SBSTA-8 in June 1998  to produce a scientific and technical report on this topic.  In addition, SBSTA-12 adopted conclusions that, inter alia:  requested indication of how the additional activities  proposed by Parties in their submissions, due on 1 August  2000, relate to the objectives and principles of the FCCC  and Protocol; agreed to a data reporting format for  Parties' 1 August submissions and decided to consider this  data at SBSTA-13; requested Parties to provide textual  proposals on Article 3.3 and 3.4; and asked the SBSTA  Chair, with the FCCC Secretariat, to prepare a synthesis of  textual proposals from Parties' 1 August submissions.

# REPORT OF THE WORKSHOP

SBSTA Chair Harald Dovland (Norway) opened the workshop on  Monday, 10 July, and welcomed participants. He said the new  IPCC Special Report on LULUCF marks a watershed in work on  this issue and provides a strong scientific basis for  decisions on the various policy options available. He noted  the upcoming 1 August deadline for the submission of  proposals and information on activities related to Article  3.3 (net changes in emissions and removals by sinks from  afforestation, reforestation and deforestation) and 3.4  (additional human-induced activities relating to changes in  emissions and removals) of the Kyoto Protocol. Noting that  COP-6 was rapidly approaching, he informed participants  that consultations on LULUCF have been tentatively  scheduled for the second week of October.

Antoni Tokarczuk, Minister of the Environment of Poland,  noted that this workshop was being held in response to a  request by SBSTA to analyze the IPCC Special Report in the  context of the requirements of Protocol Article 3.3 and  3.4. He stressed the importance of wise land use and  forestry policies in addressing climate change concerns and  outlined elements of Poland's National Sustainable Forestry  Policy, including: conservation of existing forest areas;  promotion of natural forest regeneration; and reduction of  clear-cutting. Stating that LULUCF is one of the most  important issues addressed by the Protocol, he urged  participants to work to achieve 'concrete results' that  could support the Protocol's entry into force in 2002.

COP-5 President Jan Szyszko (Poland) stressed the  opportunity this workshop provides to make progress on  LULUCF. He noted the carbon storage, biodiversity, socio- economic and other benefits of sound forestry policy.

The Co-Chairs of the workshop, Halldor Thorgeirsson  (Iceland) and Philip Gwage (Uganda), introduced the agenda  for the meeting. Co-Chair Thorgeirsson noted concerns  expressed by a number of Parties on the agenda items  relating to discussion of possible elements of decisions.  He stressed that this workshop was not a forum for  negotiating outcomes.

## AFFORESTATION, REFORESTATION AND DEFORESTATION UNDER  ARTICLE 3.3

On Monday, 10 July, the workshop considered afforestation,  reforestation and deforestation (ARD) under Article 3.3 of  the Kyoto Protocol. Participants heard presentations from  lead authors of the IPCC Special Report on LULUCF, as well  as speeches by representatives of five country Parties.  These presentations were followed by a general discussion  on the issue.

### IPCC OVERVIEW

IPCC Chair Bob Watson highlighted key issues  for decisions, including:defining a forest, including whether to use single or  multiple thresholds of canopy cover; addressing aggradation and degradation of forested  land; excluding or including the harvest-regeneration cycle  and the problem of accurately reflecting within the  accounting system the corresponding actual changes in  carbon dioxide in the atmosphere; addressing the question of permanence of carbon  sequestered in the biosphere and the risk of reversibility  of such sequestration; differentiating between direct and indirect human- induced activities that increase carbon stocks; identifying which carbon pools to monitor, including  issues related to costs, the need for precision and  technical feasibility, and monitoring of project-based  activities; and addressing incentives and disincentives for carbon  sequestration between 1990 and the beginning of the first  commitment period in 2008.

He illustrated the potential size of ARD activities in  Annex I countries and globally under different accounting  approaches and based on different options for the  definition of a forest.

Bernard Schlamadinger, IPCC/Joanneum Research, Austria,  provided an overview of ARD issues under the IPCC Special  Report, focusing on the harvest-regeneration cycle,  aggradation/degradation and the limit of forest-nonforest  conversions. He said that, under the IPCC definitional  scenario, ARD activities are based on transitions between  forest and non-forest uses. Under the FAO definitional  scenarios, the harvest-regeneration cycle is included and  aggradation/degradation can be included under ARD  activities, although this requires multiple thresholds in  the definition of a forest. He demonstrated the  implications of definitional and accounting options and  noted that the accounted stock change would generally be  different from the actual stock change during a commitment  period, which would lead to artificial credits and debits.  He concluded that the IPCC definitional scenario provided  the highest consistency between reported and actual changes  in carbon stocks on land under ARD activities, noting that  this scenario was likely to result in debits in Annex I  Parties overall, and that aggradation/degradation would be  easier to cover under Article 3.4 than under Article 3.3.

### PARTY PRESENTATIONS

Michael Gytarsky, Senior Scientist,  Institute of Global Climate and Ecology of the Federal  Service of Russia for Hydrometeorology and Environmental  Monitoring and Russian Academy of Sciences, discussed  definitions of ARD within the framework of Article 3.3 and  3.4 of the Protocol. He suggested that these definitions be  extended to include various human activities aimed at  reducing greenhouse gas emissions and increasing sinks. He  suggested considering the inclusion of fire prevention as a  human-induced activity under Article 3.4.

Klas Österberg, Principal Technical Officer, Swedish  Environmental Protection Agency, discussed Swedish carbon  budgets in relation to the Protocol. He outlined  calculations on above-ground biomass carbon and emphasized  that Article 3.3 would not benefit Sweden due to  implications of the harvest-regeneration cycle. He said  slow growth in early rotation cannot compensate for carbon  in harvested wood, and could instead create a significant  carbon debit.

Yuji Kimura, Office of Research and Information,  Environment Agency of Japan, addressed ARD under Protocol  Article 3.3. He suggested that the selection of a  definition and accounting framework for Article 3.3  activities should include incentives to promote sinks  activities. He said the definition and accounting framework  should encourage carbon sequestration in the harvesting- regeneration cycle in Annex I countries where it is a key  factor. He supported the FAO activity-based accounting  method, stating it could promote appropriate harvesting and  regeneration.

Yeshey Penjor, National Greenhouse Gas Project Manager,  National Environmental Commission of Bhutan, discussed  LULUCF in a national context. He defined land-use planning  as a means of supporting farmers and rural communities  dependent on natural resources to increase their standard  of living in an environmentally sustainable manner.

Kazimierz Rykowski, Professor of Forestry, Polish Forest  Research Institute, highlighted the importance of  developing a set of definitions and accounting procedures,  as well as a measuring and monitoring system. Noting  difficulties in reaching agreement on the definition of a  forest, he suggested focusing instead on seeking  definitions and descriptions of ARD and 'forestry  activities.' While agreeing with the IPCC's Special Report  that afforestation and reforestation should be classified  as forestry activities, he said deforestation should not  be, as it does not take place within forest management.

### DISCUSSION

In the ensuing discussion, France, speaking on  behalf of the EU, said its position is still being  developed. However, he highlighted the Council of  Ministers' Decision of 23 June 2000, which notes that,  inter alia: the inclusion of sinks should not undermine the  incentives for emissions reductions or biodiversity  conservation; a decision on inclusion of further activities  under Article 3.4 should not apply until after the first  commitment period, unless concerns relating to scale,  uncertainty and risks are resolved; sinks should not be  included under the CDM; and decisions should be consistent  with sustainable forest management.

The UK called for a simple, environmentally-defensible  framework for decisions and accounting approaches. WWF  addressed the issue of control of forest fires, and  questioned how a baseline could be established. On using a  Leaf Area Index as a method for measuring carbon stocks,  Robert Watson suggested that this was not a particularly  useful approach.

On the definition of a forest, Finland supported using  existing FAO definitions, with which countries are already  familiar. Bolivia stressed that adopting a simple, single  threshold definition of a forest would result in a loss of  accuracy and said the approach needs improvement. Japan  stressed the inclusion of the harvesting-regeneration cycle  under Article 3.3 to provide incentives to fully utilize  sinks, especially in countries with little opportunity for  increasing forested areas. Norway opposed this suggestion,  stressing the need to keep accounting simple. He supported  the IPCC framework, but underscored the need to address the  problem of increases in carbon stocks in boreal forests  generating debits under the accounting framework.

On ARD and forests, Australia suggested including Article  3.3 and 3.4 within a single framework, supported by ARD  definitions. He noted the differences between  afforestation, reforestation and deforestation,  highlighting that deforestation needs an accounting  framework that ensures that the extent of land-use change  is monitored. FAO emphasized the dynamism of forestry  definitions and acknowledged that current FAO definitions  may not fully meet the needs of carbon accounting. He said  FAO will continue revisiting the question of definitions  and will seek input and suggestions. Tuvalu, on behalf of  the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS), suggested  considering not only ecosystem accounting but also  transactional accounting. He also highlighted the Parties'  varying levels of technical capability to undertake  accounting measurements.

On transparency, Germany emphasized the importance of a  transparent accounting system that allows those outside of  the Expert Review Teams to have access to areas that have  been afforested.

Several delegates addressed the issue of potential  discrimination or loopholes relating to credits and debits  due to discrepancies between the timing of the first  commitment period and the requirement under Article 3.3  that Parties consider ARD activities since 1990. Australia  and Finland proposed that sub-rules or exclusions could be  developed to avoid any unintended consequences - such as  potential encouragement of deforestation prior to, rather  than during, the first commitment period, in order to avoid  debits. AOSIS said the implications of sub-rules would need  to be considered. He stressed that commitment periods  should run contiguously, and said policymakers should take  a longer-term perspective that accounts for the fact that  disadvantages accrued during the first commitment period  would be likely to disappear in the second or third period,  depending on the length of the forestry rotation period.  Workshop Co-Chair Thorgeirsson said exceptions or sub-rules  should focus on the time prior to the first commitment  period, and agreed with participants' comments that  commitment periods should be contiguous.

On inclusion of non-CO2 greenhouse gases, Finland stressed  that not enough was known of the balances in activities  under Article 3.3 for a well-informed decision to be made.  Emphasizing the need for simplicity, the UK and Japan  argued against inclusion of non-CO2 greenhouse gases.  Australia, with the Netherlands, supported including all  greenhouse gases, adding that the intent behind Article 3.3  was not to focus solely on CO2. He highlighted the risk of  unintended effects if a comprehensive approach is not  taken, citing the case of applying fertilizers to enhance  CO2 uptake and unintentionally increasing N2O emissions.  Ireland said including all greenhouse gases was a  reasonable proposal, but cautioned that methodological  issues would need to be resolved.

The US said activities under Article 3.4 could be used to  address limitations in activities under Article 3.3. She  said harvested wood products should be included as a  managed pool within the accounting framework. She  highlighted the idea that definitions could vary by Party,  involving a review process to ensure technical credibility  and consistency over time. On the definition of a forest,  she said the FAO definitions have not been adopted for  carbon accounting and need to be considered more carefully.  She preferred definitions to be made at the individual  Party level. She questioned the role of sub-rules and  whether their purpose was to provide incentives for future  behavior or penalize and reward past behavior.

On soil carbon, AOSIS said presentations had addressed  above-ground carbon stocks, but noted that they had not  necessarily taken below-ground carbon stocks into  consideration. Germany, opposed by Japan, supported the  inclusion of soil carbon under Article 3.3, saying it would  give incentives for sustainable management. He also  cautioned against credits for carbon that has not been  genuinely accumulated. The UK said accounting procedures  should be clear and simple and not too detailed.

## ADDITIONAL HUMAN-INDUCED ACTIVITIES UNDER ARTICLE 3.4

On Tuesday, 11 July, participants met in morning and  afternoon sessions to consider additional human-induced  activities under Article 3.4 of the Kyoto Protocol. Lead  authors of the IPCC Special Report presented an overview of  the Special Report's coverage of this issue, followed by a  question-and-answer session. In addition, representatives  of five Parties and one NGO made presentations, also  followed by a question-and-answer session. Participants  then engaged in a general discussion on the issue.

### IPCC OVERVIEW

IPCC Chair Bob Watson outlined key elements  requiring decisions relating to Article 3.4 (additional  human-induced activities relating to changes in emissions  removals), including which activities to include, if any,  and whether a Party should be obliged to report on the  entire set of selected activities. He then identified  several key issues under Article 3.4, including:whether to adopt a broad or narrow definition of an  activity; how much land will need to be monitored,  including cost; how to address the issue of baselines; what the implications are of potential 'windfalls' due  to increases in carbon resulting from natural effects and  indirect human-induced activities such as CO2  fertilization, nitrogen deposition, and effects of climate  change; what ancillary benefits exist; and how to resolve permanence issues.

Ian Noble, IPCC Special Report Lead Author, Australian  National University, outlined options for the definition of  an activity. He said a broad definition would provide a  more simplistic approach covering all practices on an area  of land, while a narrow definition - based on individual  practices - would permit greater accuracy. He suggested  that a broad definition would be more compatible with land- based accounting, while a narrow definition would better  suit activity-based accounting, although any combination  could be made to work. He then discussed 'scientific  baselines,' noting the need to account for the human- induced element. He concluded by elaborating opportunities  or 'potentials' under Article 3.4, identifying groups of  activities relating to improved management and land-use  change. He said estimates suggested that forest, cropland  and grazing management could have significant benefits for  Annex I Parties, while transforming degraded agricultural  land to agroforestry could particularly benefit non-Annex I  Parties.

### QUESTION-AND-ANSWER SESSION

In the subsequent question- and-answer session on the IPCC overview, AOSIS queried  whether identifying specific 'potentials' was appropriate  at this stage. The UK noted that the scientific baseline  was not a baseline as it is regularly understood. He  stressed the importance of separating human-induced effects  from natural causes under Article 3.4. Replying to concerns  raised by China over conflicting land-use priorities, Ian  Noble said changes from current agricultural practices to  agroforestry should be carefully designed to ensure overall  benefits to the population, and said agroforestry should  not be practiced on prime agricultural land.

On questions relating to monitoring and verification, Noble  acknowledged the high costs involved and raised the need  for a discussion on costs and benefits. On verification, he  commented that there should be mechanisms in place, such as  spot checks and checking of documentary evidence, coupled  with indirect verification through academic scientific  papers.

On carbon crediting, the European Commission highlighted  social and environmental baselines, emphasizing the  Protocol's sustainable development goals.

### PARTY PRESENTATIONS

David Boulter, Senior Climate Change  Advisor, Canadian Forest Service, provided a national  perspective of forest management under the Protocol. He  suggested that sustainable forest management would be a  cost-effective sink opportunity for Parties to fulfill  their emissions targets and should be included under  Article 3.4.

Andres Arnalds, Deputy Director, Iceland's Soil  Conservation Service, discussed carbon sequestration by  revegetation. He emphasized that degradation is a global  phenomenon and highlighted the multiple benefits of  revegetation, including wide-ranging socio-economic  benefits and the encouragement of non-forest species.

Adele Morris, Special Advisor, US State Department,  presented a national perspective on the LULUCF long-term  approach and phase-in for the first commitment period. She  suggested LULUCF objectives should include: linking Article  3.3 as a package with Article 3.4; incorporating a long- term system; assisting Parties to meet Kyoto targets cost- effectively; and considering a phase-in approach to address  first commitment period issues. She proposed moving toward  a system of complete greenhouse gas accounting on all  managed lands and emphasized that Article 3.4 activities  should be broadly defined and take a comprehensive  approach. She suggested a phase-in option to full  accounting for the first commitment period, including:  adjusting assigned amounts by including only net removals  over a certain threshold; and applying a discount rate to  specified accounts before adjusting assigned amounts. She  recommended consideration of incentives and ancillary  environmental effects in domestic implementation and land  conversion accounting.

Konrad Tomaszewski, General Director of State Forests for  Poland, discussed the role of State involvement in and  ownership of forested areas in addressing climate change  concerns. He outlined Poland's forestry management  legislation, principles and activities. He concluded that  government involvement in forest management has played a  significant role in enhancing carbon storage, including  through development of an effective forest fire protection  system and a strong afforestation programme.

Lorenzo Ciccarese, Senior Researcher on Climate and  Forestry for Italy's National Environmental Protection  Agency, presented Italy's national experience relevant to  Article 3.4, including identification and estimation of  relevant changes in the carbon budget. He described work on  estimating changes in carbon storage and outlined relevant  policies, including: emissions avoidance activities; soil  carbon conservation; forest conservation; and forest  management and silviculture techniques.

### NGO PRESENTATION

Stephan Singer, Head of WWF's European  Climate and Energy Policy Office, discussed Article 3.4  activities and repercussions on the integrity of the  Protocol. He said Parties should agree to: prohibit  projects and credits without agreed inventories and  independent monitoring; address leakage and permanence  concerns; and exclude commercial forestry and business-as- usual projects. He expressed concern that industrialized  countries might attempt to negotiate an agreement at COP-6  that would effectively allow CO2 emissions to increase by  25-50%. He drew attention to a report on technical and  additional potentials for activities under Article 3.4  relating to sequestration by cropland, rangeland and forest  management, which concluded that Article 3.4 activities  could create significant new entitlements for countries  with large landmasses, as well as the potential for serious  loopholes.

### QUESTION-AND-ANSWER SESSION

In the ensuing question-and- answer session, a number of participants asked Adele Morris  for additional information on the US position. On  thresholds, Morris said an option for the phase-in proposal  during the first commitment period was to adjust assigned  amounts by including only net removals over a set  threshold. She suggested that this threshold could vary by  Party to fit their specific circumstances. In response to  questions from Japan and France on the idea of discount  rates, Morris said this related to the phase-in proposal  and would involve straightforward percentage discounts for  particular accounts - for instance, forest management  accounts - before adjusting assigned amounts. AOSIS  expressed concern over the degree to which the US position  differed from the business-as-usual scenario.

In response to a query relating to WWF's position on sinks  and the CDM, Stephan Singer said a key concern was that  domestic action should not be undermined as the primary  tool in meeting Protocol commitments.

### DISCUSSION

Following these presentations and question-and- answer sessions, delegates discussed key issues relating to  Article 3.4. On activities under Article 3.4, Poland said a  wide range of activities should be promoted through the  framework of sustainable forest management. Finland  emphasized the role of biofuels and called for national  circumstances to be considered when deciding on additional  activities. Emphasizing the importance of carbon in  agricultural soils, Canada supported the inclusion of  cropland and grassland management and agro-forestry. Uganda  stressed that credits should not be awarded for business- as-usual.

Germany, supported by the Netherlands, said activities  should not be included under Article 3.4 during the first  commitment period unless concerns related to the scale of  the use of sinks, scientific uncertainty and risks related  to permanence were addressed. He suggested a pilot project  period for activities under Article 3.4 to gain a better  understanding of them. AOSIS recommended Article 3.3 as the  key pilot phase in the first commitment period.

On accounting approaches, Norway supported full carbon  accounting that includes soil carbon and non-CO2 greenhouse  gases in the long term. The Netherlands agreed, but called  for careful consideration of short-term implications.  Canada and Japan supported a broad land-based approach.  Australia said its aim was to continue working on a  framework approach to accounting, across Article 3.3 and  3.4.

On wood products, Canada and France drew attention to  opportunities relating to construction products. Finland  noted the environmental soundness of wood products, while  observing that discussion on their inclusion is scheduled  for 2001.

The US National Association of Regulatory Utility  Commissioners supported FAO-based definitions and an  accounting framework that reflects land-based human  activities.

IPCC Chair Bob Watson summarized key issues emerging from  the discussions, which he said included:recognition of the difficulty of including  aggradation/degradation and the harvest-regeneration cycle  under Article 3.3 and implications for the links between  Article 3.3 and 3.4; the possibility of using a single threshold that could  vary between countries and biomes; the potential role of wood products under either  Article 3.3 or 3.4; recognition that the magnitude of a windfall would be  very high compared with sequestration achieved through  management practices under Article 3.4; and an interest in associating sustainable forest  management with carbon enhancement.

## PROJECT-BASED ACTIVITIES

On Tuesday evening, 11 July, and Wednesday, 12 July,  participants considered the issue of project-based LULUCF  activities. Lead authors of the IPCC Special Report  presented an overview of the Special Report's coverage of  this topic, followed by a question-and-answer session. In  addition, representatives of seven Parties, five NGOs and  two business/industry organizations made presentations,  also followed by a question-and-answer session.

### IPCC OVERVIEW

IPCC Chair Bob Watson said the first  question relating to project-based activities was whether  or not to include sinks in the CDM and, if they are  included, which ones to allow. Sandra Brown, IPCC Special  Report Lead Author, provided information on, inter alia:development of baselines, which can be project- specific or generic, and fixed or regularly updated; leakage, which refers to cases where the benefits of a  project are canceled out through the shift of the unwanted  activity, such as deforestation, to a site outside the  project boundaries; approaches to accounting for and mitigation of  leakage; permanence; and measuring, monitoring and verification of selected  pools.

Watson noted that these issues must also be addressed in  energy projects, while observing that the question of  permanence is considered more difficult for LULUCF  projects.

### QUESTION-AND-ANSWER SESSION

In the ensuing question-and- answer session, the European Commission drew attention to  the possibility of leakage having positive effects. In  response to a question on leakage by the Netherlands,  Sandra Brown highlighted the development of 'look-up  tables' for leakage covering different types of tree  species and based on market supply and demand. The US  underscored the distinction between the cost and price of  carbon, and said there may be opportunities to sell at a  significant profit. Brown noted that currently there is no  price for carbon, as there is no market and the only  information available relates to investment costs.

In response to a question by the US on baselines, Brown  said baselines in some existing projects are now being  revisited to update or add field data. She noted that, with  an increased number of projects, there will be added  incentive and data to develop generic baselines. The  Central African Republic queried what could be done to  monitor small-scale projects in rural areas. Brown said it  was a question of encouraging cooperation at the local  level, after which standard statistical sampling could be  used. With regard to a possible minimum area size or carbon  offset, she said several small projects could be bundled  into larger ones.

Finland drew attention to the complexity of the underlying  causes of deforestation, highlighting structural and socio- economic factors, and questioned how much a project  approach would actually address the wider problem of  deforestation. Watson replied that, while it is important  to identify the root cause and to change policy and  institutional frameworks, projects could be of value and  are the only feasible approach under the climate change  framework.

In response to a comment by the UK on the possibility of  using sectoral baselines, Watson said this could be a  viable option, although it required careful consideration.  AOSIS highlighted the need for dialogue with indigenous  peoples.

### PARTY PRESENTATIONS

Joy Grant, Executive Director,  Programme for Belize, spoke about the Rio Bravo Carbon  Sequestration Project. She outlined the project's history  and objectives, including conservation, sustainable  forestry, and sustainable development. She outlined the  amount of carbon sequestered and discussed the community  benefits.

Salah Tahoun, Land Resources Advisor, Egyptian  Environmental Affairs Agency, discussed afforestation in  Egypt. He highlighted the important commonalities for  forestry between the FCCC, the Convention to Combat  Desertification (CCD) and the Convention on Biological  Diversity (CBD), and called for consideration of overlaps  between these conventions.

Alimin Djisbar, National Technical Expert for Forestry,  Indonesia, presented the case of afforestation of degraded  land in Jambi Province, Sumatra. He spoke about degraded  grasslands and the multipurpose use of tree species.

René Yvon Brancart, President of Côte d'Ivoire's National  Committee on Climate Change, discussed the development and  condition of forests in Côte d'Ivoire. He highlighted the  significance of forests for rural livelihoods, particularly  in meeting energy needs.

Jesada Luangjame, Researcher, Forest Research Office, Thai  Royal Forest Department, spoke about the status of forests  and reforestation in Thailand. Highlighting increases in  protected areas and reforestation, he said Thailand is  striving to manage forests in a sustainable manner with a  view to achieving CO2 benefits.

Sergio Jauregui, Advisor on LULUCF and Climate Change,  Bolivian Vice Ministry of Environment, discussed the Noel  Kemmpff Mercado Climate Action Project in Bolivia. He  highlighted the two components of emissions reduction:  eliminating logging, and eliminating conversion of forest  to agricultural land. The project addressed leakage by  providing alternative economic opportunities for the  affected communities. It also addressed the issue of  permanence by: assimilating the area indefinitely into a  national park; controlling fires; including local  communities in park management; and discouraging migration  by providing key infrastructure for the local population.

Ken Andrasko, Office of Atmospheric Programs, US  Environmental Protection Agency, outlined US views on  project-based LULUCF activities. He noted the importance of  LULUCF in the global carbon cycle, the fact that projects  could be widely distributed internationally, and the  potential for co-benefits that may be larger than the  carbon benefit. He argued that the potential problems of  additionality over business-as-usual, leakage and  permanence should be addressed through appropriate rules  and project design.

### NGO AND BUSINESS PRESENTATIONS

Mika Coda, Vice President  of the Nature Conservancy's Climate Change Programme,  speaking on behalf of the Climate Action Network-US,  supported inclusion of forest conservation under the CDM,  stating that deforestation is a significant source of  emissions and projects can provide co-benefits. Outlining  proposed rules, he said the small number of possible  projects means Annex I countries will still be required to  undertake significant domestic emissions reduction  measures.

John Kinsman, Manager of Atmospheric Science for Edison  Electric Institute, and Gary Kaster, Chair of the Utilitree  Carbon Company, outlined US electric utility views on  forestry projects. Kinsman provided an overview of  experience in forestry-related projects, including issues  related to permanence and leakage. Kaster called for, inter  alia: a comprehensive full carbon accounting system  addressing all significant sources and sinks; and forestry  projects to be included under the CDM.

Jacob Olander, Fundacion Natura, spoke about the  contribution of LULUCF projects under the CDM. Addressing  concerns about the CDM, he stressed the need for rules and  criteria for all types of projects. He highlighted the  importance of, inter alia, full and adequate measurement  and monitoring of greenhouse gas impacts; strategies to  address underlying causes of deforestation and degradation;  and mechanisms for avoiding negative impacts and  guaranteeing adequate stakeholder participation.

Igino Emmer, Consultant, FACE Foundation, discussed the  design and management of reforestation projects, outlining  the Foundation's portfolio of reforestation projects to  sequester CO2. He emphasized the benefits of certification  and verification of forest management projects and called  for development of sound monitoring programmes.

Gareth Phillips, Société Générale de Surveillance (SGS),  outlined early experiences with verification of land-based  projects. Highlighting the importance of eligibility, he  said SGS had developed its own carbon offset verification  scheme, including acceptability, additionality,  externalities and capacity. He suggested that a number of  potential JI/CDM projects exist, and said these will need  to overcome challenges relating to, inter alia: eligibility  criteria; accounting methodology; and defining  rules/guidance on baselines. He recommended using average  carbon capacity for calculating stock changes.

Ken MacDicken, Director of Research, Center for  International Forestry Research (CIFOR), outlined the  opportunities for rural livelihoods under CDM forestry  projects. He highlighted the dual purposes of the CDM and  discussed potential benefits and risks associated with  these projects. He emphasized the importance of undertaking  social impact assessments. He highlighted the need for,  inter alia: incentives for multiple benefits; the inclusion  of a broad range of LULUCF options under the CDM; a  reduction in transaction costs; the approval of tonne-year  accounting; and strengthening of local capacities. He  concluded that livelihood issues are not a reason to  exclude LULUCF from the CDM and that effective rule-making  can increase the probability of positive impacts.

Bill Hare, Climate Policy Director, Greenpeace  International, spoke on land-use change and forestry  activities under the CDM. He opposed inclusion of these  activities, stressing problems related to: climate change  mitigation, as every tonne of CO2 sequestered effectively  permits an additional tonne of emissions; the sustainable  development criterion and its lack of positive impacts on  social and equity issues and technological development; and  a likely over-estimation of forest conservation and  biodiversity protection due to the effects of leakage and a  focus on inexpensive sequestration projects.

### QUESTION-AND-ANSWER SESSION

In the ensuing question-and- answer session, Germany asked whether the prospect of  carbon credits for emissions avoidance, such as prevention  of planned deforestation, could act as an incentive for  deforestation activities. In response, Sergio Jauregui said  this was not a problem in Bolivia, where deforestation is  primarily due to socio-economic reasons, and where most  people involved in deforestation would not be aware of the  Kyoto Protocol or carbon credits. He said any attempts to  manipulate the credit system would be identified at the  accreditation stage.

In response to a question from Switzerland on how  compatible Greenpeace's opposition to LULUCF projects under  the CDM was with the objectives of the Protocol, Bill Hare  noted that LULUCF carbon credits would not be an  appropriate means of achieving stable atmospheric  concentrations of CO2, given questions of permanence and  additionality and said that, based on current scientific  knowledge, proceeding by reducing emissions was preferable.  He also suggested that the Protocol was not necessarily the  most suitable context for addressing in-depth forest  management issues. Responding to comments on how best to  move forward, Ken Andrasko said the US supported working in  parallel on the key issues rather than addressing one after  the other.

Nigeria questioned whether developing countries would  benefit from sinks projects under the CDM and emphasized  the need for social impact assessments of projects' long- term implications. Bill Hare suggested that Parties only  consider renewable energy projects under the CDM.

Mexico commented on the importance of co-benefits in sinks  projects. Ken MacDicken agreed, suggesting harmonization of  projects with co-benefit elements from the CBD and Global  Environment Facility programmes. Austria underscored the  risks of increased forest losses due to perverse  incentives. In response, Gareth Phillips said that clear  guidelines are necessary to avoid potential deforestation  arising from such incentives. Responding to a question from  Senegal on baselines in Bolivia, Sergio Jauregui said the  baseline assumes that: logging companies continue to  exploit and farmers continue slash and burn practices;  parameters are dependent on the rate of logging of nearby  forest concessions and historical land-use trends  established by communities; and carbon monitoring relies on  satellite data, data from nearby logging concessions, and  permanent plots. Australia inquired about the lack of  carbon projects in degraded land areas in Africa. Ken  MacDicken responded that restoring degraded savannah lands  using sinks projects would require the transfer of  sophisticated technology to resolve the problem of water  constraints.

## GENERAL ACCOUNTING, VERIFICATION AND REPORTING ISSUES

On Wednesday afternoon, 12 July, and Thursday morning, 13  July, participants considered the issue of general  accounting, verification and reporting issues relating to  LULUCF activities. Lead authors of the IPCC Special Report  presented an overview of the Special Report's coverage of  this topic. In addition, representatives of four Parties  and one business organization made presentations. This was  followed by a question-and-answer session.

### IPCC OVERVIEW

Workshop Co-Chair Thorgeirsson introduced  this topic, noting that accounting, verification and  reporting represent the backbone of LULUCF activities.

Ian Noble, IPCC Special Report Lead Author, noted that the  Special Report had addressed issues of accounting,  verification and reporting. He stated that the Revised 1996  Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories were  devised to meet the requirements of the FCCC rather than  the Protocol, and said an elaboration would be needed. Co- Chair Thorgeirsson highlighted the importance of  distinguishing between which broad decisions need to be  taken by COP-6 and which issues can be dealt with at a  later stage.

### PARTY PRESENTATIONS

Ian Carruthers, Australian Greenhouse  Office, outlined Australia's perspective on carbon  accounting for LULUCF. He said land areas would enter into  an accounting system for Article 3.3 and 3.4 once eligible  LULUCF activities were established on that land. He  suggested that, once the land area entered into the  accounting framework, all changes in greenhouse gases and  carbon stocks from all relevant pools should be included,  and the land should remain within the system into future  commitment periods. He expressed a preference for a narrow  approach to the selection of activities and land-based  accounting. He drew attention to Australia's work on  developing a national carbon accounting system, which he  said could be applicable to other countries.

Wayne Lindwall, Director, Agriculture and Agri-Food, Semi- Arid Prairie Agriculture Research Center, Canada, discussed  measurement and verification of carbon stock changes  relating to agricultural soils. He provided a national  perspective on the implications of LULUCF for the  agriculture sector, highlighting the importance of  considering below-ground carbon stocks and addressing  sources and sinks in a balanced way. He noted the potential  for benchmark data in long-term studies to distinguish  between human-induced and natural activities.

Wojciech Galiñski, Researcher for Silvatica Research  Consultants, Poland, spoke about the effect of  uncertainties in data on estimating CO2 sequestration for  the land-use change and forestry sector in Poland. He said  that, although the IPCC method for measuring greenhouse  gases is relatively simple, it requires a considerable  number of high quality, locally-generated data, and  suggested that wide use of the IPCC definitional scenario  may result in systematic calculation errors.

Dominick Kwesha, Manager of the Vegetation Resources  Inventory System (VegRIS) Project, Zimbabwe Forestry  Commission, discussed land-use and vegetation mapping. He  illustrated the importance of land-use and vegetation  mapping in monitoring LULUCF based on experiences with the  VegRIS Project, which aims to improve management and  sustainable use of vegetation resources in Zimbabwe. He  noted that VegRIS monitors: deforestation hotspots and  degraded lands; resettlement areas; biodiversity areas; and  fuelwood deficit areas. He suggested that the potential  exists for monitoring carbon reservoirs/pools in Zimbabwe  by developing VegRIS to cover a national biomass inventory.

### BUSINESS PRESENTATION

Thomas Häusler, Remote Sensing  Expert from the Company for Applied Remote Sensing (GAF),  spoke about Earth observation in the context of LULUCF  applications. He highlighted, inter alia, the reliability  and cost benefits of using remote sensing to provide data  for forest inventories and to monitor ARD at frequent  intervals. He stressed the need for a standardized  nomenclature and harmonized technical procedures. He noted,  however, that remote sensing cannot be used to measure  carbon stocks, and suggested using appropriate indicators  to monitor changes after extensive field studies coupled  with remote sensing to determine the baseline.

### QUESTION-AND-ANSWER SESSION

In the ensuing question-and- answer session, Wayne Lindwall responded to a question by  Fiji on carbon stocks by noting that they typically need to  be assessed to the depth of 30 centimeters, as most soil  carbon is stored in the top layers. He agreed with a  comment by the Netherlands that detecting changes in soil  carbon can sometimes be difficult within the standard five- year monitoring cycle.

Responding to a question by the EU on leakage under Article  3.3 and 3.4, Ian Carruthers said some leakage is inevitable  as long as landscapes are not comprehensively covered by  the accounting system. On comments relating to the  inclusion of degradation under the definition of  deforestation, he supported defining deforestation as a  significant removal, and said Australia is working on a  suggestion under Article 3.3, given that the outcome under  Article 3.4 is uncertain. He outlined an approach that  defines a reduction of at least 30% in the proportion of  canopy cover per hectare on a given area of forest land as  deforestation, and said the reduction must be due to direct  human-induced removal of trees.

In response to a question by Canada on the rate of uptake  of remote sensing in African countries, Zimbabwe, Nigeria  and Kenya stressed positive experiences, but emphasized  high initial costs, the need to build local expertise, and  the benefits of future cooperation in the region. Poland  highlighted the benefits of partial harvest, an  increasingly common practice that can enable higher  sequestration, due to the limited influence on undergrowth.

On the issue of permanence, Wayne Lindwall responded to a  question from Sudan by suggesting that carbon loss from  agricultural lands will be recorded under a comprehensive  accounting system. Bernard Schlamadinger, IPCC, stressed  that permanence is the main difference between the energy  and LULUCF sectors. He noted that the permanence of  activities under Article 3.3 and 3.4 would be addressed in  the inventories of Annex I countries, provided that  commitment periods are contiguous, while permanence under  the CDM could be addressed through liability rules, tonne- year accounting, buffers, project portfolios and insurance  policies.

FAO informed participants about systematic terrestrial  observations under the International Global Observation  System (IGOS), including the Terrestrial Carbon Observation  Initiative and the Global Observation of Forest Changes. He  noted the challenges of combining satellite observations  and ground observations.

## LINKAGES WITH OTHER ARTICLES OF THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

On Thursday morning, 13 July, Workshop Co-Chair  Thorgeirsson asked participants to consider the question of  linkages with other articles of the Protocol, stressing the  importance of being aware of the connections between the  various issues under negotiation. Helen Plume (New  Zealand), Co-Chair of the SBSTA contact group on Protocol  Articles 5 (methodological issues), 7 (communication of  information) and 8 (review of information), outlined  progress in negotiations on these issues, which she said  included preparation of various sets of guidelines for  Annex I Parties. She noted that the development of good  practice guidance relating to national systems for data  collection did not include the LULUCF sector specifically,  although the principles did apply. She noted linkages  between Articles 5, 7 and 8 with other issues under  negotiation, including compliance, mechanisms and LULUCF.  She drew attention to the fact that final decisions on some  parts of the guidelines under Articles 5, 7 and 8 depend on  decisions being taken in other areas, citing as an example  that it will not be possible to determine what will be  reported under Article 7 or reviewed under Article 8 until  definitions under Article 3.3 are determined. She observed  that, in spite of the linkages between Articles 5, 7 and 8  and LULUCF, there appeared to be very little overlap in the  composition of the two negotiating groups working on these  issues. The UK noted that work on good practice could be  applicable at least in part to the LULUCF sector.

AOSIS highlighted the significant overlaps and linkages  between the Protocol mechanisms and LULUCF. He applauded  positive examples of proposed CDM projects that attempt to  address difficult issues such as non-permanence. However,  he drew attention to 'bad projects,' noting the potential  for leakage. He also highlighted the importance of  considering liability issues and called for independent  verification and certification of projects. Noting  proposals for credits for emissions avoidance projects, he  asked if Parties responsible through private companies for  deforestation in developing countries would have such  actions included as debits. Côte d'Ivoire, with Burkina  Faso, noted the multiple socio-economic effects of forests  and forestry in Africa, and asked how credits might be  allocated for projects relating to forests owned by foreign  companies. Nigeria noted that the focus of discussions had  been on forestry rather than land-use change in general. He  suggested that credits for projects could be awarded at the  end of the project, rather than earlier.

Noting a need for reliable data and information, Poland  called for an international, multidisciplinary research  project relating to various elements of the Protocol and  regional rural development, including socio-economic  considerations. Bolivia highlighted links between Article  12 (CDM) and Article 3.3 and 3.4, and suggested holding a  discussion on possibly assigning a proportion of actions  under CDM to LULUCF activities and a proportion for energy  projects. Co-Chair Thorgeirsson said linkages between the  various climate change issues in the lead-up to COP-6  should also be carefully considered within delegations.

## CONCLUSIONS OF THE CO-CHAIRS

On Thursday afternoon, 13 July, Co-Chair Thorgeirsson  summarized the key issues addressed during the workshop. He  highlighted four main crosscutting issues that emerged:coverage - addressing what, when and how to measure  and monitor carbon stocks relating to LULUCF, which  encompass issues such as certainty and permanence; attribution or separation - distinguishing between  human-induced and natural causes; accounting - including what 'triggers' entry of land  into an accounting system under Article 3.3 and 3.4, issues  of reporting, transparency, and third-party verification;  and links to assigned amounts - addressing questions of  credit assignments.

He concluded that policy makers have a critical  responsibility to develop sound policy judgments and  prioritize issues. He suggested the possibility of  exploring and synthesizing these issues further, while  noting that there was to be no formal report from the  workshop.

In the ensuing discussion, Germany emphasized the need to  take into account differences in national circumstances  when considering carbon credits. Japan highlighted  variation between the credits gained from sinks activities  and emissions targets and recommended incentives for  countries that are disadvantaged in terms of land area. The  European Commission underscored the potential financial  implications of excluding the residual sink from credit  systems. The US underscored the significant scientific  uncertainty surrounding the potential residual sink, and  called for more research in this area.

AOSIS called for a political overlay to the scientific  framework for LULUCF issues provided by the IPCC Special  Report, stressing the need to give appropriate  consideration to issues such as the accounting system for  assigned amounts and processes of verification. Commenting  on views expressed by participants on the need for  consideration of national circumstances, he cautioned  against a 'pick and choose' approach, where the activities  to be included under Article 3.4 are selected at the  national level. Canada, supported by New Zealand, replied  that the intention was not a 'pick-and-choose' system, but  getting to the same goal via different routes that reflect  each countries' unique circumstances. He said superimposed  solutions that do not fit should be avoided. France  suggested using existing systems and procedures at the  national level as far as possible for accounting,  monitoring and verification. Poland stressed the need for a  good description of 'baseline' with common elements for all  Parties. Austria recommended taking equity issues into  consideration. Australia, supported by the US, noted the  continuation of the process beyond COP-6, which he stressed  was not the end point. He said options under Article 3.4  could be sequenced and decisions at COP-6 should focus on  what is needed for the first commitment period, while  keeping the long-term future in mind. Recalling the  decisions on LULUCF at Kyoto, Finland stressed that  decisions taken at COP-6 must be such that national-level  implications are clear.

## CLOSING PLENARY

In the closing Plenary on Thursday afternoon, 13 July, COP- 5 President Jan Szyszko said the aim of the workshop was to  increase understanding of the issues and of participants'  respective positions. Workshop Co-Chair Philip Gwage said  useful progress was made at this meeting and noted the  prevailing view among participants that sinks are an  extremely important issue. He also reflected on  participants' concern that the decisions taken in relation  to LULUCF must preserve the integrity of the FCCC and  Protocol. He hoped that the advances made at this workshop  would be built upon at SB-13.

Workshop Co-Chair Halldor Thorgeirsson said this was a very  productive workshop that assisted in building the bridge  between the technical phase and the policy phase of  discussions. He said the workshop was an effective method  for proceeding carefully through the IPCC Special Report,  and stated that the presence of the lead authors  contributed greatly to progress, as had the quality of  presentations and participants' discussions. He highlighted  the lessons learned on how to increase the probability of  projects meeting Protocol and environmental objectives, and  said successful projects are those that meet local goals  and aspirations. He said this workshop provided time to  carefully consider the issues and contributed to collective  understanding of participants' various perspectives.

On the process leading to COP-6, Co-Chair Thorgeirsson said  the next step was for Parties to prepare submissions by 1  August outlining their positions on various matters  relevant to Article 3.3 and 3.4. He noted that Annex I  Parties also need to submit some preliminary data and  information relating to Article 3.4. He said the  submissions would provide a considerable amount of  information and material to be digested and discussed at  SB-13, and noted that informal consultations would take  place between SB-13 and COP-6 to assist in developing the  final text for a decision at COP-6.

Dennis Tirpak, SBSTA Coordinator for the FCCC Secretariat,  said this had been a very focused workshop and expressed  the hope that it was of benefit to all Parties. Co-Chair  Thorgeirsson thanked participants, the Government of Poland  for its hospitality in hosting the workshop, and the  Secretariat, and closed the meeting at 4:00 pm.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR BEFORE COP-6

### FCCC CONSULTATIONS AND WORKSHOPS

A number of workshops and  consultations were announced at SB-12 to assist the process  leading to SB-13, including: consultations on compliance  from 18-20 July 2000 in Reykjavik, Iceland; consultations  on technology transfer from 2-4 August 2000, in Colorado,  USA; an African regional workshop on non-Annex I  communications from 14-18 August 2000 in South Africa; and,  informal consultations on adverse effects from 23-25  August 2000, tentatively planned for Bonn, Germany. For  more information, contact: the FCCC Secretariat; tel: +49- 228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail:  secretariat@unfccc.de; Internet: http://www.unfccc.int

### XXI IUFRO WORLD CONGRESS

The International Union of Forest  Research Organizations' (IUFRO) World Congress will meet in  Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, from 7-12 August 2000. For more  information, contact: Congress Secretariat IUFRO 2000,  Putra World Trade Center, 41 Jalan Tun Ismail, 50480 Kuala  Lumpur, Malaysia; e-mail: iufroxxi@frim.gov.my; Internet:  http://iufro.boku.ac.at/iufro/congress/

### CONGRESS OF THE 29TH INTERNATIONAL GEOGRAPHICAL UNION  COMMISSION ON CLIMATOLOGY

This conference will take place  from 9-13 August 2000 in Seoul, South Korea. The theme of  the conference is 'Climate Change and its Impacts.' For  more information, contact: Hyoun-Young Lee, Department of  Geography, Konkuk University, 93-1, Mojin-dong, Kwangjin- gu, Seoul, 143-701, South Korea; tel: +822-446-6756; fax:  +822-446-8194; e-mail: leekwons@kkucc.konkuk.ac.kr

### FIFTH INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON GREENHOUSE GAS CONTROL  TECHNOLOGIES (GHGT-5)

This conference will take place from  13-16 August 2000, in Cairns, Australia. For more  information, contact: Colin Paulson, CSIRO Energy  Technology, PO Box 136, North Ryde, NSW 1670, Australia;  tel: +61-2-9490-8790; fax: +61-2-9490-8909; e-mail:  c.paulson@det.csiro.au;  Internet:  http://www.ieagreen.org.uk

### INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON FOREST ECOSYSTEMS - ECOLOGY,  CONSERVATION AND SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT

This conference  will meet in Chengdu, Sichuan, China, from 15-21 August  2000. The conference will aim to share the knowledge and  technologies needed for sustainable management of forest  resources and biodiversity conservation and to promote  multifunctional management and forest resources  utilization. For more information, contact: Shi Zuomin and  Dong Na, Institute of Forest Ecology, Environment and  Protection, Chinese Academy of Forestry, tel: +86-10-6288- 8308 or 6288-9513; fax: +86-10-6288-4972; e- mail:Shizm@fee.forestry.ac.cn or  Keyan.hb@fee.forestry.ac.cn; Internet:  http://www.agnic.org/mtg/2000/icfeecsm.html

### 13TH SESSION OF THE FCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES

SB-13 will  convene from 11-15 September 2000 in Lyon, France, and will  be preceded by one week of informal meetings, including  workshops. For more information, contact: the FCCC  Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999;  e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.de; Internet:  http://www.unfccc.int

### LULUCF CONSULTATIONS

Informal SBSTA consultations are  tentatively scheduled to take place during the second week  of October with the aim of making further progress on  negotiations prior to COP-6. For more information, contact:  the FCCC Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815-1000; fax: +49-228- 815-1999; e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.de; Internet:  http://www.unfccc.int

### FAO EXPERT CONSULTATION ON FOREST CHANGE

This meeting will  take place from 16-20 October 2000 in San Jose, Costa Rica.  For more information, contact: Robert Davis, Senior  Forestry Officer (Forest Resources Appraisal and  Monitoring), Forestry Department, FAO; tel: +39-06-570- 53596; e-mail: Robert.davis@fao.org: Internet:  http://www.fao.org/forestry/Forestry.htm

### 11TH INTERNATIONAL SOIL CONSERVATION ORGANIZATION  CONFERENCE

ISCO 2000 will be held from 22-27 October 2000  in Buenos Aires, Argentina. For more information, contact:  Faculty of Agronomy - University of Buenos Aires, e-mail:  isco2000@mail.uba.ar; Internet:  http://www.isco2000.org.ar/ingles/index-ing.htm

### EARTH TECHNOLOGIES FORUM

This meeting, organized by the  Alliance for Responsible Atmospheric Policy, will be held  in Washington, DC, USA, from 30 October - 1 November 2000.  For more information, contact: Alliance for Responsible  Atmospheric Policy: tel: +1-703-243-0344; e-mail:  alliance98@aol.com; Internet: http://www.earthforum.com/

### NATIONAL AND REGIONAL CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACT ASSESSMENTS IN  THE FORESTRY SECTOR

This meeting will be held from 10-13  November 2000 in Potsdam, Germany, and will be hosted by  the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research and  European Forest Institute. For more information, contact:  Marcus Lindner, Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact  Research, Telegrafenberg, P.O. Box 601203, D-14412 Potsdam,  Germany; tel: +49-331-288 2677; fax: +49-331-288-2695; e- mail: lindner@pik-potsdam.de; Internet: http://www.pik- potsdam.de/

### SIXTH CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE FRAMEWORK CONVENTION  ON CLIMATE CHANGE

COP-6 will be held in The Hague, The  Netherlands, from 13-24 November 2000. For more information  contact: the FCCC Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815-1000; fax:  +49-228-815-1999; e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.de; Internet:  http://cop6.unfccc.int