---
title: "SUMMARY OF THE WORKSHOP ON COMPLIANCE UNDER THE KYOTO PROTOCOL: 1-3 MARCH 2000"
id: enb12124e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12124e
date: 2000-03-03
abstract: "The Workshop on Compliance under the Kyoto Protocol to the  Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC) was held from  1-3 March 2000 at the Wissenschaftszentrum, Bonn, Germany.  The Workshop was designed to assist in the development of  elements of procedures and mechanisms relating to a  compliance system for in-depth consideration at forthcoming  meetings of the Joint Working Group on Compliance (JWG).  The workshop was organized by the FCCC Secretariat and the  Co-Chairs of the JWG. Eighty-one participants attended the  workshop, including representatives of governments, inter- governmental organizations (IGOs) and non-governmental  organizations (NGOs)."
---

Participants heard presentations and discussed various  issues related to the creation of a compliance system under  the Protocol including: linkages between Articles 5  (methodological issues), 7 (communication of information)  and 8 (review of information) and the compliance system;  institutional design; outcomes or consequences of non- compliance or potential non-compliance; general provisions;  and a framework. On the basis of discussions during the  workshop as well as their working paper resulting from the  consultations held in Montreux in February, the Co-Chairs  will endeavor to develop a text that could form the basis  for negotiations at the twelfth session of the subsidiary  bodies (SB-12).

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FCCC AND THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

The FCCC was adopted on 9 May 1992, and was opened for  signature at the UN Conference on Environment and  Development in June 1992. The FCCC entered into force on 21  March 1994, 90 days after receipt of the 50th ratification.  It has currently received 181 instruments of ratification.

### COP-1

The first Conference of the Parties to the FCCC  (COP-1) took place in Berlin from 28 March - 7 April 1995.  In addition to addressing a number of important issues  related to the future of the FCCC, delegates reached  agreement on the adequacy of commitments and adopted the  'Berlin Mandate.' Delegates agreed to establish an open- ended Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate (AGBM) to begin a  process toward appropriate action for the period beyond  2000, including the strengthening of Annex I Parties'  commitments through the adoption of a protocol or another  legal instrument. COP-1 also requested the Secretariat to  make arrangements for sessions of the subsidiary bodies on  scientific and technological advice (SBSTA) and  implementation (SBI). SBSTA serves as the link between the  information provided by competent international bodies, and  the policy-oriented needs of the COP. SBI was created to  develop recommendations to assist the COP in the review and  assessment of the implementation of the Convention and in  the preparation and implementation of its decisions.

Ad Hoc GROUP ON ARTICLE 13: AG13 was set up to consider the  establishment of a multilateral consultative process (MCP)  available to Parties to resolve questions on  implementation. AG13-1, held from 30-31 October 1995 in  Geneva, requested Parties, non-Parties, IGOs and NGOs to  make written submissions in response to a questionnaire on  an MCP. At their fifth session, delegates agreed that the  MCP should be advisory rather than supervisory in nature  and AG13 should complete its work by COP-4, which it did at  its sixth session.

Ad Hoc GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE: The AGBM met eight  times between August 1995 and COP-3 in December 1997.  During the first three sessions, delegates focused on  analyzing and assessing possible policies and measures to  strengthen the commitments of Annex I Parties, how Annex I  countries might distribute or share new commitments and  whether commitments should take the form of an amendment or  a protocol. AGBM-4, which coincided with COP-2 in Geneva in  July 1996, completed its in-depth analysis of the likely  elements of a protocol and States appeared ready to prepare  a negotiating text. At AGBM-5, which met in December 1996,  delegates recognized the need to decide whether or not to  permit Annex I Parties to use mechanisms that would provide  them with flexibility in meeting their quantified emissions  limitation and reduction objectives (QELROs).

As the protocol was drafted during the sixth and seventh  sessions of the AGBM, in March and August 1997,  respectively, delegates 'streamlined' a framework  compilation text by merging or eliminating some overlapping  provisions within the myriad of proposals. Much of the  discussion centered on a proposal from the EU for a 15% cut  in a 'basket' of three greenhouse gases (GHG) by the year  2010 compared to 1990 emission levels. In October 1997, as  AGBM-8 began, US President Bill Clinton included a call for  'meaningful participation' by developing countries in the  negotiating position he announced in Washington. In  response, the G-77/China distanced itself from attempts to  draw developing countries into agreeing to new commitments.

### COP-3

The Third Conference of the Parties (COP-3) was held  from 1-11 December 1997 in Kyoto, Japan. Over 10,000  participants, including representatives from governments,  IGOs, NGOs and the media, attended the Conference, which  included a high-level segment featuring statements from  over 125 ministers. Following a week and a half of intense  formal and informal negotiations, Parties to the FCCC  adopted the Kyoto Protocol on 11 December.

In the Protocol, Annex I Parties to the FCCC agreed to  commitments with a view to reducing their overall emissions  of six GHGs by at least 5% below 1990 levels between 2008  and 2012. The Protocol also established emissions trading,  'joint implementation' (JI) between developed countries,  and a 'clean development mechanism' (CDM) to encourage  joint emissions reduction projects between developed and  developing countries. To date, 84 countries have signed and  22 have ratified the Protocol. The Protocol will enter into  force 90 days after it is ratified by 55 States, including  Annex I Parties representing at least 55% of the total  carbon dioxide emissions for 1990.

### COP-4

The Fourth Conference of the Parties (COP-4) was  held from 2-13 November 1998 in Buenos Aires, Argentina,  with over 5,000 participants in attendance. During the two- week meeting, delegates deliberated decisions for the COP  during SBI-9 and SBSTA-9. Issues related to the Protocol  were considered in joint SBI/SBSTA sessions. A high-level  segment, which heard statements from over 100 ministers and  heads of delegation, was convened on Thursday, 12 November.  Following hours of high-level closed door negotiations and  a final plenary session, delegates adopted the Buenos Aires  Plan of Action (BAPA). Under the Plan of Action, the  Parties declared their determination to strengthen the  implementation of the FCCC and prepare for the future entry  into force of the Protocol. The BAPA contains the Parties'  resolution to demonstrate substantial progress on: the  financial mechanism; the development and transfer of  technology; the implementation of FCCC Articles 4.8 and  4.9, as well as Protocol Articles 2.3 and 3.14 (adverse  effects); activities implemented jointly (AIJ); the  mechanisms of the Protocol; and the preparations for the  first Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of  the Parties to the Protocol (COP/MOP-1).

### SBI-10 AND SBSTA-10

The subsidiary bodies to the FCCC held  their tenth sessions in Bonn, Germany, from 31 May - 11  June 1999, and began the process of fulfilling the BAPA.  SBSTA considered topics such as Annex I communications,  methodological issues and the development and transfer of  technology. SBI discussed, inter alia, administrative and  financial matters and non-Annex I communications. SBI and  SBSTA jointly considered the mechanisms of the Protocol,  AIJ and compliance. A joint SBI/SBSTA working group on  compliance (JWG) discussed identification of compliance- related elements, including gaps and suitable forums to  address them; design of a compliance system; and  consequences of non-compliance. The JWG resolved to hold a  workshop to facilitate informal exchange of views on  relevant issues, including experiences under other  conventions.

### INFORMAL EXCHANGE OF VIEWS AND INFORMATION ON COMPLIANCE  UNDER THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

The informal exchange of views  and information on compliance under the Kyoto Protocol was  held in Vienna, Austria, from 6-7 October 1999. The  informal exchange was designed to facilitate deliberations  on the development of a compliance system under the  Protocol. Ninety-seven participants attended the meeting,  including experts, representatives from governments, UN  agencies, and IGOs and NGOs. Participants met in several  sessions over two days to hear presentations from experts  and discuss various issues related to compliance,  including: compliance regimes under the Montreal Protocol,  the Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution  and its protocols, the International Labor Organization and  the World Trade Organization; institutional issues such as  facilitative and enforcement functions, eligibility to  raise issues and information gathering; and issues related  to the consequences of non-compliance.

### COP-5

The Fifth Conference of the Parties (COP-5) met in  Bonn, Germany, from 25 October - 5 November 1999. With over  3000 participants in attendance and 165 Parties  represented, delegates continued their work toward  fulfilling the BAPA. Ninety-three ministers and other heads  of delegation addressed COP-5 during a high-level segment  held from 2-3 November. During its last two days, COP-5  adopted 32 draft decisions and conclusions on, inter alia,  the review of the implementation of commitments and other  FCCC provisions, and preparations for COP/MOP-1. On  compliance, COP-5 adopted the JWG Conclusions  (FCCC/SB/1999/CRP.7) which, inter alia: invited Parties to  submit further proposals on compliance by 31 January 2000;  confirmed that a workshop on matters relating to a  compliance system would be convened in March 2000; and  requested the JWG Co-Chairs to further develop the elements  of procedures and mechanisms relating to a compliance  system for in-depth consideration at forthcoming meetings  of the JWG and to serve as a basis for negotiation of a  compliance system at SB-12. Informal consultations were  convened in Montreux, Switzerland from 9-11 February 2000,  in preparation for the workshop on compliance.

# REPORT OF THE WORKSHOP

The Workshop on Compliance under the Protocol was opened by  Co-Chair Amb. Tuiloma Neroni Slade. He informed  participants that the Co-Chairs, in pursuance of their  mandate from COP-5 to consult widely, had convened an  informal consultation in Montreux, Switzerland, from 9-11  February 2000. Based on the results of this consultation  and 15 written submissions from Parties, the Co-Chairs had  prepared a working paper outlining the elements of a  compliance system for consideration during the workshop.  Co-Chair Slade described the workshop as an informal  exchange of views, not a negotiating session, aimed at  providing the Co-Chairs with a better understanding of  Parties' positions so as to enable them to formulate a  paper for consideration at SB-12. He identified the need to  discuss four groups of issues:general issues, including nature, principles and scope  of application; functions and institutional arrangements for carrying  out functions; outcomes and consequences of non-compliance; and other issues, including relationship with Articles 16  (MCP) and 19 (dispute settlement).

## ELEMENTS OF A COMPLIANCE SYSTEM UNDER THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

### PRESENTATIONS

Participants heard six presentations on  Parties' proposed elements for a compliance system under  the Protocol.

AOSIS identified four basic functions and the institutional  arrangements to carry them out. First, Expert Review Teams  (ERTs) would conduct technical assessments of information  submitted by Annex I Parties under Articles 5  (methodological issues) and 7 (communication of  information). Second, the Mechanisms' Eligibility Committee  would determine the eligibility of a Party to participate  in the mechanisms, an administrative rather than a quasi- judicial function. Third, the Compliance Committee would  promote Parties' compliance with Protocol commitments  during the compliance period, and fourth, the Enforcement  Panel would determine non-compliance with Article 3.1  (quantified emission limitation and reduction commitments)  and impose penalties and consequences. The IUCN asked if it  may be appropriate to have enforcement type activities  during the compliance period. AOSIS responded that it  envisaged an overlap between enforcement and compliance  functions.

JAPAN said one of the features of its proposal was the  existence of a Committee on the Kyoto Mechanisms. This  committee would be part of the Compliance Body and handle  questions of compliance with the mechanisms' eligibility.  To avoid a traffic jam before the first commitment period,  she said eligibility would not be automatically determined,  but could be considered on a voluntary basis or if  questions of implementation were raised. On the functions  of the Compliance Body, she said it could take either  facilitation and enforcement kind of action. She then  highlighted a special procedure for the Committee on the  Kyoto Mechanisms that would ensure an expeditious  resolution of issues within 60 days, in principle,  including through the use of electronic meetings. On the  consequences of non-compliance, she suggested an indicative  list adopted without an amendment to the Protocol whereby  the suspension of specific rights and privileges could be  recommended to the COP/MOP only as a last resort. She  concluded by stressing the need to take advantage of the  existing articles in the Protocol in order to allow its  early entry into force.

The US proposal highlighted five functions of the  compliance entity: to decide which referred matters would  be pursued; to provide advice and facilitation; to address  allegations about the eligibility to use mechanisms; to  determine whether an allegation of non-compliance is well  founded; and to determine outcomes of non-compliance. He  said the compliance entity would be divided into two  components: a facilitative one, to consider all aspects of  compliance with the Protocol and could go as far as issuing  warnings; and a judicial one, focusing on Article 3.1 and  on the mechanisms' eligibility. He added that there was a  need for consequences of non-compliance with Article 3.1,  such as the subtraction of tons from a subsequent period  with a penalty rate, to be identified in advance. He then  reviewed four linkages between the compliance regime and  the mechanisms. First, on the eligibility, he referred to  the linkage between, on the one hand, compliance with  Articles 5 and 7 and, on the other hand, loss of access to  the mechanisms. He also highlighted the possibility of  adjustments by ERTs as a way of preventing non-compliance  with Article 5.2 (methodologies for estimating emissions).  Second, on who reviews what aspect of compliance related to  the mechanisms, he suggested that: ERTs review the use of  sinks as well as the eligibility to use the mechanisms; a  CDM body, such as the executive board, review the validity  of Certified Emission Reductions (CERs); and an audit  process review Emission Reduction Units (ERUs).Third, on  the relationship with Article 7 he stressed the need for  domestic compliance institutions and suggested that Parties  have the obligation to report on these. Finally, he  commented on whether there was a need for a distinct  treatment in handling compliance with Article 3.1 and  eligibility issues. Following a question by SAUDI ARABIA,  he said the enforcement component of the compliance entity  would primarily deal with developed country obligations  under Article 3.1.

AUSTRALIA, in outlining its vision for a compliance system,  said the compliance process would be initiated through the  Article 8 (review of information) expert review process.  Questions of Annex B Parties' implementation of their  legally binding obligations identified by ERTs would be  directed to the compliance system. In this context, she  highlighted the need to include criteria in the guidelines  to be provided to ERTs under Article 8.4 (COP/MOP to adopt  and review guidelines for the review of implementation of  the Protocol by ERTs). Such criteria would identify what  constitutes 'questions of implementation' and when these  would move from the technical review stage to the  compliance system. She stressed the need for a facilitative  stage to precede an enforcement stage. If a Party is found  in non-compliance after the commitment period, she  suggested it be allowed to choose one from a menu of  consequences, which would be most suitable to its national  circumstances. On linkages, she identified Articles 5, 7  and 8 as the backbone of the compliance system since they  provide the tools for assessing Parties' compliance with  their Article 3 target. Further, she suggested that since  mechanisms eligibility issues were intrinsically linked to  Article 3.1 target issues, the same compliance body deal  with both kinds of issues. Arising from this linkage, she  recommended that only a finding that an Annex I Party is  not in compliance with Articles 5 and 7 affect its  mechanisms eligibility. She also suggested that there be a  nexus between the compliance problem under these articles  and the extent of the loss of eligibility to participate in  the mechanisms.

The EU identified the functions of the compliance system as  preventing non-compliance, facilitating compliance and  repairing non-compliance. He said the compliance body  should be a standing body with separate enforcement and  facilitative branches. He advocated a total or partial  determination of eligibility to participate in the Kyoto  mechanisms prior to 2008. Members of the enforcement branch  should have judicial experience to ensure due process. He  highlighted the necessity of an expedited procedure to  determine compliance with Article 3.1. This process would  ensure due process. Questions raised on the eligibility of  Parties to participate in emissions trading and JI would be  referred to the expedited procedure but questions raised on  CDM participation would be referred to the executive board  of the CDM. On the relationship between the review process  and the compliance procedure, he said that if serious  problems, such as failure to submit the annual GHG  inventory, are identified during the initial check by the  Secretariat, the case might be referred directly to the  compliance body. For less serious problems, the next stages  of the review process, namely synthesis and assessment and  individual review, can take place. During the individual  review of GHG inventories conducted by the expert review  teams two types of problems could be identified: those with  consequences for assigned amounts and for the assessment of  compliance with Article 3 commitments, and those relevant  to the process of inventory construction. While the former  could be resolved by applying adjustments under Article  5.2, the latter would require show of progress in  subsequent reviews. Where the adjusted estimates are not  accepted by the concerned Party, or if institutional and  procedural problems are not addressed over subsequent  reviews, then the matter could be referred to the  compliance committee. On the timeline of compliance  process, he suggested that the submission of information  under Articles 5 and 7 be improved so as to bring forward  the final determination of non-compliance.

NIGERIA sought elaboration of the EU position on the  question of enforcement and, in particular, on the nature  of consequences and how they relate to Article 18 (non- compliance). The EU said that the consequences should not  only make non-compliance unattractive but also repair non- compliance. Non-compliance should be faced with predictable  and robust outcomes entailing clear economic consequences  for Parties in breach. He expressed his reservation with  respect to the proposal permitting borrowing from future  commitment periods. CHINA queried if the ERTs could trigger  cases of non-compliance. The EU responded that while the  ERTs had a clear role in identifying questions of  implementation, it could only forward them to the  compliance body through the Secretariat. He said that no  enforcement was possible during the commitment period. He  added, however, that the information made available to the  compliance committee during the commitment period could be  handled through facilitation. The US sought clarification  on the phrase 'compliance with KP criteria' in the context  of eligibility criteria for the mechanisms. The EU  explained that the phrase was intended to convey a  distinction between criteria for project-based mechanisms  and criteria related more generally to the Parties.

SAUDI ARABIA said the compliance system should be simple  and close to what was agreed to in the Protocol, in  particular Articles 5, 7 and 8. He said the compliance  system would have facilitative and enforcement functions,  in accordance with Articles 16 (MCP) and 18, and follow a  staged approach. He stressed that issues of eligibility  should not be dealt with by a compliance system since these  were only reflected in Article 6 (JI), and not in Article  18. Co-Chair Slade questioned such a narrow reading of  Article 18.

## LINKAGES - ARTICLES 5, 7 AND 8, THE KYOTO MECHANISMS AND THE  COMPLIANCE SYSTEM UNDER THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

### PRESENTATIONS

Participants heard 11 presentations on  linkages between Articles 5 (methodological issues), 7  (communication of information) and 8 (review of  information), the Kyoto mechanisms and the compliance  system under the Protocol.

Introducing her submission on the linkages between Article  8 and adjustments under Article 5, JAPAN highlighted the  three stages of the inventory review process: initial check  by the Secretariat; synthesis and assessment of  inventories; and review by ERTs. She said a Party could  make adjustments during these three stages only in two  cases: the Party's inventory is incomplete; and/or country- specific methodologies and/or emissions factors are used  but supporting documents are considered insufficient. The  ERTs' report would indicate if a Party neither made  adjustments nor accepted the emissions estimate made by the  ERTs. This report would be published and sent to the  Parties and the compliance body through the Secretariat.  Following a question by the US, she said that a voluntary  adjustment by a Party during the review process did not  mean that the issue could not go to the compliance body. In  cases of egregious violations the issue could be sent to  the compliance body.

The FCCC Secretariat presented compliance-related issues in  the work on Articles 5, 7 and 8. On guidelines for national  systems, he said one issue was how registries might be  reflected in national systems. On reporting, he  highlighted, inter alia, the coverage and detail of  reporting, and the timing and frequency of submission of  supplementary information. On review, he said Parties  generally suggested that, inter alia: there should be a  pre-commitment review of the assigned amount units (AAUs)  and of Articles 5 and 7 to allow the use of mechanisms;  there should be guidance to identify questions of  implementation; and the results of the two-year technical  inventory review trial under the FCCC are directly relevant  to the Article 8 guidelines and could lead to enhancements  in the future. He added that among the issues to be  considered were the overall timing of the review,  adjustment and compliance processes. In this regard he  cautioned that the different steps between the end of a  year for which an inventory needed to be submitted and a  COP decision on compliance could require as much as 38  months.

Following concern expressed by the US and the EU on the  need for an expeditious procedure on eligibility, the  Secretariat said he hoped to gather experience by 2008,  solve issues before the beginning of the first commitment  period, and find ways to expedite the review process.

The FCCC Secretariat outlined the state of play on  negotiations on the mechanisms. She informed participants  that a draft text was to be reviewed at the informal  consultations on mechanisms to be held in Kuala Lumpur  later this month. She indicated the proposals made by  Parties on, inter alia: eligibility; compliance-related  issues; institutional issues related to the CDM; and the  executive board. On eligibility to participate in  mechanisms, one proposal was that Annex I Parties must be  in compliance with Articles 5 and 7 and that both Annex I  and non-Annex I Parties comply with FCCC Article 12  (communication of information related to implementation).  On compliance-related issues, one proposal was that if a  Party is not in compliance with Article 3 (quantified  emission limitation and reduction commitments), CERs  acquired should be invalidated either in part or in full.

CANADA sought a clarification on the idea of 'pre- commitment review of the assigned amount.' The Secretariat  said that Parties needed to decide whether a preliminary  calculation of the assigned amount is required before the  commitment period commences. On post-commitment review, the  US and the EU expressed concern about the 38-month timeline  identified by the Secretariat for review under the  Protocol. The Secretariat said that it expected to revise  this estimate with increasing experience with the technical  review process. He highlighted the need for Parties to  cooperate on timelines and the role of money in  facilitating and expediting the review process. Co-Chair  Harald Dovland suggested that the submission of preliminary  data might shorten the review period. Co-Chair Slade  stressed the importance of reporting on domestic  compliance. The INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE asked  what the practical impact would be on projects in case  unclear questions arise in the review process or if non- compliance is determined to exist. In response, the FCCC  said it would depend on the way the CDM is developed by the  Parties.

The OECD's presentation highlighted the common issues and  inter-linkages between compliance, eligibility and  baselines, free riders, monitoring and review, and domestic  systems. On emissions trading, she said linkage issues  included defining 'supplemental' to domestic action,  eligibility, liability, accounting for AAUs and  inventories. She added that if participants included  private/legal entities, national implementation was key and  the market was more likely to thrive. She stressed that  national implementation systems were needed not only for  emissions trading but also to monitor the effects of  policies and measures. On the CDM, she said that the  oversight bodies such as the executive board and the  operational bodies were already built into the Protocol and  that their relationship with the review process needed to  be clarified. On the review of national communications, she  highlighted the new functions introduced by the Protocol:  assess demonstrable progress by 2005; assess eligibility;  identify potential problems or factors influencing the  fulfillment of commitments; and start the facilitation  process. She concluded by listing the priorities for COP-6:  basics of the compliance system; institutional design and  oversight of the CDM; baselines guidance; eligibility rules  for the mechanisms; role of adjustments; and stronger and  more focused review of Annex I national communications.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEFENSE said both NGOs and the industry agree  on the need for an accountability and compliance framework  for 'making the atmosphere whole' and for competitiveness  reasons, respectively. She highlighted that the failure of  a Party to report on emissions should result in the  attribution of 'uncontrolled' emissions levels and  suspension of selling of allowances. In cases where the  emissions exceeded the net assigned amount, the Party  concerned would be subject to an immediate true up through  the purchase of surplus AAUs, ERUs or CERs. In case of  failure to do so, the excess emissions would be deducted  from the next commitment period with a penalty.

Following a question by BRAZIL on the compatibility of such  a deduction with the objective of 'making the atmosphere  whole,' she said this deduction, although necessary, would  not be a sufficient incentive for ensuring compliance  during the budget period. Other incentives and measures  under Article 18 needed to be elaborated. She then  suggested that, in the absence of an international  enforcement authority, 'constituencies for compliance,' be  created both among nations, and among communities and  companies at the domestic level. She concluded by stressing  the importance for clear rules on an accountability and  compliance framework to be adopted at COP-6 in order to  allow investment decisions leading to emissions reductions  to take place before 2008.

The CENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL LAW outlined the  elements of a Compliance Fund. If there are insufficient  credits available during the true up following the end of  the commitment period, Parties could be faced with  breaching their Protocol obligations, even if they have the  will to comply. In such cases, Parties could pay a fee into  the Compliance Fund and receive credits equivalent to the  extent of their overage and thus avoid being out of  compliance when the true up ends. Fees collected by the  Compliance Fund would be used to underwrite highly reliable  'gold standard' GHG mitigation projects throughout the  world, such as renewables and demand-side management  projects. The fees would be set on the basis of actual  estimated mitigation costs, plus a surcharge to account for  administrative costs, funding for adaptation and the risk  of project failure. He suggested that the CDM administer  the Fund. He identified several strengths of the Compliance  Fund, including simplicity, reliability and efficiency and  one weakness, namely that it requires payment to an  international institution, which is politically  unpalatable. He said that one way of addressing this  question would be to set up a domestic fund, administered  by the Party in overage. He pointed out however that  significant oversight and verification issues would arise  in this case.

The WORLD WILDLIFE FUND elaborated on various measures,  remedial and punitive, to address non-compliance. On  remedial measures, she highlighted various types of  financial penalties, including the dynamic or floating  financial penalty based on the costs of developing gold  standard mitigation projects and the fixed rate financial  penalty based on a per ton rate. On the notion of allowing  a Party to cure its overage from one commitment period by  reducing its assigned amount from the next, she said: it  allows Parties to defer taking action to eliminate the  overage; it contains the possibility that Parties will  repeatedly roll-over their overage by freely borrowing from  commitment period to commitment period thereby destroying  the integrity of the commitment period; it may provide an  incentive rather than a disincentive for non-compliance if  the penalty pay-back rate is set too low; and it provides  little assurance to other Parties that the environmental  harm and economic benefits of non-compliance will be  corrected, thus potentially diminishing the will of those  Parties to comply with their own targets. On punitive  measures, she highlighted several options including public  approbation, suspension of treaty privileges and trade- related measures. She stressed that even in the case of  deminimis violations the full penalty should apply since  the Party could easily cure the overage through the use of  mechanisms or the Compliance Fund. Failure to do so  demonstrated bad faith and warranted consequences.

The CENTER FOR CLEAN AIR POLICY stressed that GHG  accounting was fundamental. He said ERTs should be more  than what they had been until now and that the private  sector could help in ensuring the quality of data either as  a subcontractor of part of the ERTs' work or to pre-certify  the quality of the data systems generating activity data.  He also said there was a need to establish clear rules on  when an inventory could be adjusted and when the  methodologies for estimating GHGs presented such major  problems that an adjustment was not possible, therefore  emissions trading could not take place. On tools to ensure  compliance, he suggested preventive as well as deterrent  measures. He said preventive measures could include the  annual submission by a Party of the listing of AAUs retired  to cover its estimate of aggregate equivalent emissions in  that year. He added that although sanctions could be of a  political and/or economic nature, he favored treaty-related  sanctions, such as the requirement to purchase AAUs or the  deduction of AAUs from the subsequent period with a  penalty, and trade-related sanctions, such as the loss of  the rights to sell or buy AAUs during the subsequent  period. He also highlighted that the success of other  trading systems such as the US SO2 market had been  attributed to the existence of financial penalties.

The INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE pointed out that  while governments would be bound by the Protocol, companies  are bound by national legislation. He said differences in  national legislation might have an impact on companies'  business strategies. On mechanisms, he said cost- effectiveness was essential and that excessive rules,  regulations and costs should be avoided. He referred to  possible ceilings on the use of mechanisms and said these  would bring uncertainties since they could lead to the non- approval of a long-planned CDM project. On the consequences  of non-compliance, he asked how enforcement measures would  treat a company in compliance with domestic legislation in  a country that was itself not complying with its  international obligations. He added he could not accept the  retrieval of GHG reductions resulting from mechanisms'  transactions in cases where companies had made such  transactions in good faith.

The EDISON ELECTRIC INSTITUTE supported the concept of a  true-up period at the end of the commitment period and some  reasonable form of enforcement consistent with Article 18  (non-compliance) that does not have the effect of driving  Parties from the Protocol or FCCC pursuant to Protocol  Article 27 (withdrawal). He did not support the requirement  of financial penalties for any purpose as this would, in  the US case, be paid by US taxpayers. He suggested that as  the Protocol was unique with regard to compliance, the  focus be on facilitating compliance and learning from  experience. He recognized, however, the need for Parties to  have some certainty about the binding consequences that  would follow from non-compliance findings, and agreed that  an indicative list of consequences might be helpful. He  said that such consequences could never be automatic in  light of Article 18, which specifies that the list of  consequences to be developed by the Parties should take  into account such factors as the 'cause, type, degree and  frequency of non-compliance.' These factors would  necessarily require case-by-case consideration. He also  cautioned that suggestions that Parties could lose the  right to use the mechanisms because of alleged violations  of Articles 5 and 7and the related non-mandatory guidelines  could jeopardize their economic value for Parties and the  private sector. He reminded Parties that the Article 3  commitment is for a budget period of five years.  Consequently annual compliance ideas are adverse to this  provision.

### DISCUSSION

AUSTRIA suggested that the Compliance Workshop  identify common ground on the linkages between the  compliance system and Articles 5, 7 and 8 and present it to  the workshop on Articles 5, 7 and 8. He expressed the hope  that they could find ways to reduce the timeline of the  overall review and compliance process. He also suggested  the need for the compliance workshop to identify mandatory  requirements under Articles 5, 7 and 8 and convey them to  the methodological experts dealing with these Articles. The  UK and AUSTRALIA said that the identification of mandatory  requirements under Articles 5, 7 and 8 should be left to  the groups dealing with the mechanisms and Articles 5, 7  and 8. AOSIS suggested that a distinction be made between  mandatory elements of a technical nature and other  mandatory requirements such as reporting on domestic  compliance. He recommended that the former be determined by  the Articles 5, 7 and 8 group and the latter by the  compliance group. The CENTER FOR CLEAN AIR POLICY suggested  that the JWG agree on basic threshold levels in determining  what would constitute an egregious breach and provide some  guidance to the ERTs to allow them to decide when a matter  is beyond adjustment and a Party should enter into trading  restrictions. The US said Article 7 needed to be elaborated  in a legally binding way.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEFENSE highlighted the need for the  forthcoming Articles 5, 7 and 8 workshop to consider where  the burden of proof lies. For instance, the system could  assume that a Party's inventory is valid unless a question  is raised or vice versa. Supported by NEW ZEALAND, she  suggested discussion on the issue of linkage between  Articles 5, 7 and 8 and Article 4 (joint fulfillment of  commitments). On the issue of burden of proof for complying  with the eligibility criteria, SAUDI ARABIA said the good  faith principle required that a Party be considered  'innocent' until proven 'guilty.' SAMOA suggested referring  to 'eligibility' and 'ineligibility,' and said a Party had  to demonstrate its eligibility before it could participate  in the mechanisms. NEW ZEALAND, with AUSTRALIA, CANADA, the  US and JAPAN, stressed that Parties had a right to use the  mechanisms until a breach had been identified through the  review process. He said that the principle according to  which States are expected to act in good faith should not  be challenged. The CENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL  LAW said Article 17 did not establish a right to  participate in emissions trading. The UK explained that the  burden of proof regarding eligibility was on the shoulders  of the Party submitting its inventory, yet in the case of a  Party challenging another Party, it was up to the  challenger to prove its case. The EU suggested that Parties  have the possibility to submit themselves to a voluntary  assessment of their eligibility. Co-Chair Dovland promised  to submit a report to the Articles 5, 7 and 8 group and  convey the message that the compliance group was concerned  with reducing the timeline of the review process, without  losing quality.

## FUNCTIONS AND INSTITUTIONAL DESIGN OF A COMPLIANCE SYSTEM

Co-Chair Slade, referring to the Co-Chairs' working paper,  highlighted the four functions of a compliance system:  screening, facilitation, enforcement and assessment of  eligibility. On the institutional design of the compliance  system, he said there was general agreement that there  would be a standing compliance body or bodies, with a  distinct treatment for the mechanisms and a possible  special treatment for compliance with Article 3.1  (quantified emission limitation and reduction commitments).  One option was to have a single compliance body with a sub- structure of a body dealing with mechanisms in an  expeditious way and a body dealing with compliance with  Article 3.1. Another option was to have a single body with  two branches, a facilitative one and a quasi-judicial or  enforcement one dealing with the mechanisms, as well as  compliance with Article 3.1. He invited participants to  comment on: whether there was a need to go through a  facilitative process or if there would be two separate  facilitative and enforcement branches; in the case of two  separate branches, what their specific mandates would be;  and what the structure of the compliance body/ies would be.

CANADA questioned the Co-Chair's assumption that there was  a general agreement on the need for a distinct  institutional treatment for mechanisms. The EU, with the  US, said that not all issues would need to go through a  facilitative process. Some issues, such as eligibility,  would go directly to the enforcement branch and be  submitted to an expedited procedure. For other issues, he  supported a staged approach.

SAUDI ARABIA said the COP/MOP should have a screening  function and determine whether an issue would go to a  facilitative compliance body, the SBI or SBSTA. An ad hoc  committee could handle enforcement at a later stage. NEW  ZEALAND suggested a three-tier approach: a technical review  team, a single compliance body and a further review body.  He asked the EU who would decide which branch an issue  should go to. The EU said the issues going directly to the  enforcement branch would be pre-identified. Such issues  would include eligibility and situations in which  inventories presented such major problems that an  adjustment was not possible. In other cases, for example  when an adjustment was possible, there would be a staged  approach: the facilitative branch would be used and could  lead ultimately to an enforcement process in case of  failure by a Party to accept the adjustment proposed  through the facilitative process. NEW ZEALAND said it  should be up to the compliance body to determine cases  where there should be facilitation or enforcement. JAPAN  also questioned the EU distinction between a facilitative  and an enforcement process and said assistance would always  be helpful as a first step.

On terminology, SOUTH AFRICA suggested that there be a  'compliance system' with different bodies depending on  their facilitative and enforcement role. She said she was  not sure what a facilitative role for Annex I Parties would  mean in practice. She added it would be unfair to treat all  mechanisms in the same way. With the UNITED ARAB EMIRATES,  she said that in the case of the CDM, non-Annex I Parties  should not be affected by the fact that an Annex I Party is  not eligible. She explained that the executive board was  responsible for determining if participation in the CDM is  possible and that if a participating Party breached its  obligations, the executive board might have a role in  referring the issue to a compliance system. AUSTRALIA said  Article 3.1 and the use of mechanisms, should be at the  core of the compliance system and dealt with by the same  body. She added that every compliance issue should go  through a facilitative process. She said the possibility of  a review/appeal body should be kept in mind.

On the composition of the compliance body, BRAZIL stressed  the need to involve the entire international community. On  the question of the number of bodies, the US said that two  components would make the split in functions clearer. He  suggested that the two components have distinct functions,  approaches and compositions. He said one of the components  would have be quasi-judicial and composed of persons  capable of hearing evidence and making appropriate  decisions. He said that criteria would be set in advance to  determine which component a particular case would go to.  CHINA asked what would happen to a case that had been  referred to the facilitation component but despite  exhausting all the assistance that component could offer,  the Party was still in non-compliance.  In response, the US  said that if facilitation runs its course and yet there is  a substantial problem, the case should go to the  enforcement/judicial component. SAUDI ARABIA suggested that  the function of deciding which referrals to pursue be done  by a body other than the compliance body. SAMOA cautioned  against making sharp distinctions between enforcement and  facilitation. He said the entire process should be one of  constructive engagement and a mix of expertise should be  brought to bear on it.

## REFERRAL AND SCREENING

On how the compliance system would be initiated, Co-Chair  Slade pointed out that the questions involved were ones of  referral and screening. Referral could be by: ERTs under  Article 8 (review of information); a Party or a group of  Parties with respect to itself or themselves; a Party or a  group of Parties with respect to another Party or group of  Parties (under certain circumstances); the COP/MOP; and the  FCCC Secretariat. On screening, the issues would relate to  who would screen and on what basis. He asked participants  to focus on the criteria for screening and the role of the  COP/MOP in the screening function.

The US suggested the need to discuss the term 'under  certain circumstances.' JAPAN, with the US and SAMOA,  questioned the need to specifically provide the COP/MOP  with a referral function since referral could be by 'a  Party or group of Parties' She also questioned the need to  involve the Secretariat in the referral process. CHINA,  with the UNITED ARAB EMIRATES and NEW ZEALAND, said Parties  should be the main initiators. With BRAZIL and the US, she  questioned the role of the ERTs in the process of referral  since they were concerned only with technical information.  She argued that providing the ERTs, and the Secretariat,  with the function of referral would undermine their  objectivity. Co-Chair Slade clarified that a distinction  existed between the report of the ERTs and the ERTs  themselves. The UNITED ARAB EMIRATES said that the role of  the ERT should end once it submits its report to the  Secretariat and that the COP/MOP should merely have an  appellate role. SAMOA stressed the need to preserve the  non-confrontational aspect of the compliance process. He  said that process should not move forward merely because  one Party brings a case against another. He did not favor a  role for the Secretariat, as its objectivity would be  undermined. SAMOA said there were several difficulties with  the two-body approach, since, for instance an allegation of  a potential non-compliance could go both to the enforcement  and facilitative body.

SOUTH AFRICA sought clarification on what screening was. In  response, the US defined screening as the process that  would knock out deminimis cases and determine whether a  matter deserves to go forward. SAMOA highlighted the need  to agree on criteria to determine and knock out deminimis  cases. The US said that the COP/MOP need have no role in  the screening process. SAUDI ARABIA suggested that the  referral be by the ERTs after a subcommittee of the COP/MOP  has screened the case and decides whether it would go to  the compliance body, SBI or SBSTA. He said he did not see a  need for referrals by a Party or group of Parties with  respect to another Party or group of Parties, but if it was  to be accepted, criteria for screening should be agreed  upon.

BRAZIL said the COP/MOP had a role in referral although its  size and the frequency of its meetings might jeopardize the  efficiency of the compliance system. He suggested instead  that a COP/MOP committee composed of Party representatives  screen issues before a compliance procedure could be  initiated. He opposed a referral function for the  Secretariat but said it had a role to play in supporting  the compliance system. The EU said the Secretariat could  both constitute a source of information, since it received  the ERTs' reports, and refer cases to the compliance body  as a consequence of its initial check of Parties' reports  in the review process. ARGENTINA said non-Annex I Parties  should be able to refer a case of non-compliance with  Article 3.1 (quantified emission limitation and reduction  commitments). AUSTRALIA said ERTs had a technical  assessment function and, accordingly, an essential referral  function. She opposed a possible screening role by the  COP/MOP and said it was difficult to distinguish between a  COP/MOP committee, as suggested by BRAZIL and SAUDI ARABIA,  and a COP/MOP-established compliance body. NEW ZEALAND  opposed a possible screening by the COP/MOP or a COP/MOP  subsidiary body since the compliance process was to be  independent and of a quasi-judicial nature. Co-Chair  Dovland explained that the ERTs' reports would  automatically be referred to a screening body. This body  would apply agreed criteria to determine whether the issue  would go to a facilitative or an enforcement process. This  way, ERTs would keep their technical function.

## PROCEDURE OF TREATMENT OF CASES

Co-Chair Slade proposed a staged approach unless the issue  related to the mechanisms during the commitment period or  to Article 3.1 at the end of the commitment period.  AUSTRALIA said a staged approach should apply to every  issue and that there could be a three-month time limit for  the facilitation process relating to eligibility in order  to ensure timeliness. The US said the staged approach would  not be applicable in all cases since the screening process  may directly lead to an enforcement process. Supported by  the UK, he added that only eligibility issues would go to  an enforcement process, not any issue related to the  mechanisms.The WORLD WILDLIFE FUND explained that other  issues relating to the mechanisms were a liability system,  the existence of a ceiling as well as a post-verification  approach. The UK said there could be a close liaison  between the two EU-proposed branches of the compliance  body, including the possibility of referral from one branch  to the other, and that any conclusions resulting from a  compliance procedure would be in the name of the compliance  body. NEW ZEALAND said the absence of a formal separation  between the two branches questioned the very existence of a  separation between a facilitation and an enforcement  process.

## PROCEDURE FOR THE KYOTO MECHANISMS

On the procedure for the Kyoto Mechanisms, Co-Chair Dovland  identified the main questions: what would be the main  elements of an expedited procedure for the mechanisms;  should this procedure also consider whether non-compliance  problems are corrected and the Party in question can return  to use the mechanisms; should a Party be given a chance to  appeal the conclusion of the expedited body and, if so, who  to; and what are the timelines for each stage of the  procedure and for the procedure as a whole.

SAMOA asked that participants also consider the status of  Parties in the period between the raising of a question of  compliance and its resolution. The US said that there  should be no change in status until there is a  determination by a competent body that non-compliance  exists. The UNITED ARAB EMIRATES added that the presumption  of good faith and innocence would require that no action be  taken until there is a determination of non-compliance. In  response to this position, SAMOA suggested that Parties  should then consider retroactive liability rules for trades  that have already occurred. Following a question by the  UNITED ARAB EMIRATES, SAMOA clarified that the rule that  would be applied, namely the eligibility rule, would  already be in place so it would not actually be a case of  retroactive application of law. JAPAN highlighted the  difference between cases under Article 6.4 (question of  implementation raised in the case of JI) and other cases,  and added that in the case of retroactive penalties, the  concern voiced by SOUTH AFRICA about the effect on innocent  Parties would be relevant.

Co-Chair Dovland asked Parties to consider whether in the  case of an expedited procedure there should be an appeal.  JAPAN and SAMOA referred to their respective proposals for  a compliance system and said that such an appeal would be  available. NEW ZEALAND also favored an appeal from the  expedited procedure.

## PROCEDURES OF THE COMPLIANCE BODY/IES

Co-Chair Dovland presented the different elements of the  procedures of the compliance body/ies: decision making, due  process, procedures for appeal, sources of information,  frequency of meetings, report on activities to each session  of the COP/MOP, and rules of procedure. NEW ZEALAND said  the appeal process should be a self-contained system  divorced from political considerations and established  through Article 19 (dispute settlement). The US, with  JAPAN, stressed the importance of due process in the  enforcement procedure. He said due process included: the  right of the Party concerned to rebut evidence submitted  against it; two rounds of written submissions; and a public  hearing of some sort. He identified a need for an initial  screening stage during which the compliance body could  narrow down the issues submitted. With AUSTRALIA, he added  there should be a wide variety of sources of information  that the compliance body could use, as appropriate. The EU  said the rules of procedure would determine which sources  of information were available to the compliance body.  AUSTRALIA, supported by BRAZIL and the UK, said the appeal  procedure should be part of the compliance system and that  Article 19 only applied to bilateral disputes. On the  relationship of the compliance system with the COP/MOP, she  suggested that the outcome of the compliance body and the  appeal be submitted to the COP/MOP that would note it by  applying the negative consensus rule. On appeal, JAPAN said  the Party concerned could ask the COP/MOP to take a  decision on the need to re-examine the outcome of the  compliance body. The issue would then go back to the  compliance body for reexamination. Following a question by  CANADA, she said the COP/MOP itself could decide that a  case needed to be reexamined. SAMOA said that due process  must be balanced with the interest of the community to have  issues settled. He added that an appeal would only be  possible at the end of the commitment period. Moreover,  since one of the purposes of an appeal process was to  examine whether the compliance body had applied the law  correctly, the appeal body needed to be a separate body  from the compliance body. The UK expressed concern over the  possibility that a Party could take advantage of an  internal appeal process to expand the compliance process.  NEW ZEALAND responded that the Article 19 right of appeal  could not be limited.

## ROLE OF THE COP/MOP

On the question of how the COP/MOP would treat the  report/conclusions of the compliance body, Co-Chair Dovland  presented various options. It could, inter alia: provide  general policy guidance to the compliance body/ies; receive  reports from the compliance body/ies; consider the  conclusions of the compliance body/ies; request the  compliance body/ies to reexamine a matter; and/or accept  the report of the compliance body/ies unless the COP/MOP  decides by consensus not to adopt the report. JAPAN drew  attention to the fact that although the COP/MOP plays a  role as a general assembly and has a legitimizing function  with respect to final decisions of the compliance body, due  to the nature of COP/MOP it is practically difficult for it  to consider all the relevant issues. NEW ZEALAND opposed a  'hands on' role for the COP/MOP and, with the EU, suggested  that the COP/MOP merely provide policy 'background' to the  compliance bodies. CANADA opposed the suggestion that the  COP/MOP be entitled to ask the compliance body to re- examine a matter. On the COP/MOP's decision to accept the  report of the compliance body, he suggested that, for it to  be as non-political as possible, a simple majority be  applied. On the decision of the COP/MOP to reject a report  of the compliance body, he supported a double-majority rule  of both Annex I and non-Annex I Parties. The CENTER FOR  INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL LAW suggested the application  of a negative super majority instead of a negative  consensus rule.

SAUDI ARABIA drew attention to Article 8. 5 (COP/MOP to  consider information and questions of implementation with  the assistance of the subsidiary bodies). He suggested that  issues of implementation that could be faced by several  Parties be dealt with by the SBI and methodological issues  that could be faced by several Parties be dealt with by the  SBSTA.

## POSSIBLE OUTCOMES OR CONSEQUENCES

Co-Chair Dovland proposed three categories of possible  outcomes or consequences. The facilitative-oriented outcome  would include advice, assistance, publication of non- compliance or possible non-compliance, issuing of cautions,  and recommendation of policies and measures. The outcomes  or consequences related to the mechanisms could include the  suspension of the right to use mechanisms. Finally, the  outcomes or consequences related to Article 3.1 could  include a financial penalty or the subtraction from a  subsequent commitment period with a penalty rate. He added  that Parties had also raised the possibility of a menu  approach as well as a possible combination of outcomes or  consequences.

JAPAN, the US and others questioned the proposed three  categories of outcomes or consequences. JAPAN said  facilitative consequences would also apply to compliance  issues related to the mechanisms and that there should be a  staged approach in the case of non-compliance with Article  3.1. First, there would be publication of non-compliance,  then issuing of cautions and finally recommendations of  policies and measures. The US said a distinction between  the outcomes or consequences should be based on their  mandatory or non-mandatory nature.

AUSTRALIA favored a menu approach whereby a Party not  complying with Article 3.1 could choose from a  predetermined set of roughly equivalent consequences. SAMOA  asked whether the 'equivalence' of possible consequences a  Party could choose from would be in terms of their impact  on the environment. SAUDI ARABIA expressed concern over the  possibility of a small body such as the compliance body  recommending policies and measures, and said the impact of  such policies and measures on non-Annex I countries should  be taken into account. JAPAN said the policies and measures  that could be recommended by the compliance body would  depend on the future work of the SBI and SBSTA on policies  and measures, in particular in relation to best practices.

The UK said an exhaustive list of facilitative outcomes or  consequences would not be desirable since it would limit  the ability of the compliance body to adopt a tailored  approach. He added that a 'compliance action plan' could be  a useful tough-soft consequence whereby a non-complying  Party would voluntarily submit steps on how it intends to  comply. That Party would then be under greater pressure to  comply. The EU said that such a 'compliance action plan'  would be one way to overcome his reservations about  subtraction from future commitment periods. SAMOA said that  since Article 7 (communication of information) already  requested Parties to communicate what they intended to do  in order to comply with its commitments, a 'compliance  action plan' should go further.

SOUTH AFRICA, opposed by SAUDI ARABIA, identified a need  for automatic sanctions. CANADA made a distinction between  automaticity and predetermination of consequences. He added  that automaticity meant that the cause, type, degree and  frequency of non-compliance could not be taken into  account, as required by Article 18 (non-compliance). The US  said automaticity of sanctions meant that the consequence  of a particular case of non-compliance would be  predetermined and applied automatically. ENVIRONMENTAL  DEFENSE added that automaticity would ensure predictability  and consistency of consequences. NEW ZEALAND supported  automaticity since it would ensure predictability for the  effective functioning of the market. He objected to  financial penalties and to punitive consequences in  general. Supported by AUSTRALIA, he opposed the loss of  access to mechanisms as a result of a failure to meet the  obligations under Article 3.1. He said that such failure  should only result in the loss of ability to sell, not buy,  AAUs. He said that the proposal entailing loss of ability  to transfer AAUs until a Party had demonstrated that 'it  will have a surplus' was unclear. AOSIS and the EU  supported the retention of both proposed consequences  limiting the access to mechanisms.

The US said that in cases where Parties had agreed to  fulfill their commitments under Article 3 jointly and that  there was a case of non-compliance with Articles 5  (methodological issues) and 7, the result set forth in  Article 4.5 (individual responsibility to meet levels of  emissions in the agreement) should apply. The CENTER FOR  CLEAN AIR POLICY suggested that other consequences of non- compliance could include imposition of a compliance reserve  as well as buyer liability. INDIA cautioned against the use  of terms that are not contained in the Protocol, such as  'AAUs,' and said the JWG should not prejudge the outcome of  the work undertaken by the contact group on mechanisms.

## GENERAL PROVISIONS (OBJECTIVE, NATURE AND PRINCIPLES)

Co-Chair Dovland drew attention to the objectives, outlined  in the Co-Chairs' working paper, which include:to foster and promote compliance with commitments  under the Protocol; to provide advice and facilitate assistance in  overcoming difficulties; to prevent non-compliance with commitments under the  Protocol; and to address cases of non-compliance.

SAUDI ARABIA suggested that the compliance system be  concerned with ensuring compliance rather than preventing  non-compliance. With the UK, NEW ZEALAND and SOUTH AFRICA,  he suggested changing the language on the last proposed  objective to read: 'to determine' and address non- compliance. He stressed the need for principles to stand  alone rather than be lumped together under general  provisions. The UK, with NEW ZEALAND, suggested that since  a procedure could not guarantee compliance, the objective  'to prevent non-compliance with commitments under the  Protocol' be deleted. He suggested that the objective 'to  provide advice and facilitate assistance in overcoming  difficulties' should be elaborated to specify the  difficulties. With SAMOA, he commented that there was  overlap between the objectives and functions sections and  these two would have to be fully consistent with each  other.

SOUTH AFRICA suggested that the compliance system  specifically take on board the precautionary approach. The  UK proposed that, since the precautionary approach is a  means to an end rather than an end in itself, it should be  part of the principles rather than the objectives section.  SOUTH AFRICA expressed concern that since some Parties did  not wish to include a principles section, placing the  precautionary approach there might result in its eventual  exclusion. JAPAN questioned the utility of including the  precautionary principle since it is a general principle  that does not direct concrete action in non-compliance  cases. AUSTRALIA asked how the precautionary principle  could assist Parties in achieving compliance. SAMOA  explained that the process of inventories adjustment  illustrated a precautionary approach to compliance. With  SOUTH AFRICA and the UNITED ARAB EMIRATES, he stressed the  need to include the objective of 'making the climate  whole.' INDIA, with CHINA, stressed the importance of  including the notion of common but differentiated  responsibilities in the principles section. CANADA, with  AUSTRALIA and the US, opposed the express inclusion of  principles in the elements of a compliance framework as he  said, the compliance process should ensure the  implementation of the Protocol provisions rather than add  new rules and principles. The US, the EU and AUSTRALIA  added that the Protocol principles should be reflected in  the design of the compliance system itself.

## SCOPE OF APPLICATION

On the scope of application of the compliance system, the  Co-Chairs' working paper reads: 'apply to all commitments  in or under the Protocol; distinct treatment may be applied  to some specific commitments.' The UNITED ARAB EMIRATES  sought clarification on the purpose of using the term, 'in  or under the Protocol.' Co-Chair Dovland responded that the  term referred to the relevant rules and guidelines adopted  by the COP/MOP. The UNITED ARAB EMIRATES said that these  would be part of the Protocol. Co-Chair Dovland responded  that the issue was disputed. SAUDI ARABIA said that all the  obligations under the Protocol, not just commitments under  Article 3.1, should be covered. He added that a distinction  should be made between the rules and guidelines adopted by  the COP/MOP and the provisions of the Protocol itself. He  highlighted the fact that some Parties' commitments are  contingent on other Parties' fulfillment of their  commitments. He suggested that the scope of application of  the compliance system reflect that non-Annex I countries  are not subject to 'enforcement.' AUSTRALIA stressed that  Article 3.1 targets should constitute the core of the  compliance system.

## CLOSING SESSION

In the closing session, Co-Chair Slade introduced the  proposed main subject headings of a paper that the Co- Chairs will prepare on the elements of a compliance system  under the Protocol. He went through the different headings,  highlighting the outcome of the workshop discussions.

On general provisions, he said the objective of determining  non-compliance as well as the precautionary-approach nature  of the compliance system would be mentioned. He added that  'principles' would form a stand-alone provision. He  highlighted the possibility of having a general reference  to the principles contained in the FCCC. On the scope of  application, he said more work was needed. On the  establishment of the Compliance Institution, he said it was  up to the Parties to decide whether there would be a single  institution with an expedited procedure for eligibility  issues or with two branches. On the functions of the  Compliance Institution he noted a consensus on the four  functions outlined in the Co-Chairs' working paper and said  that the reference to eligibility requirements regarding  mechanisms needed to be made more precise. He said the  structure of the Compliance Institution needed to be  further discussed.

On referral, he took note of the possible role of the  COP/MOP. He said discussions on screening had highlighted a  possible role for the Compliance Institution, the COP/MOP  or a special committee of the COP/MOP. On the procedure for  treatment of cases, he said concerns had been expressed  over the flow of cases and that discussions had referred to  a staged approach and the identification of criteria for  assignment to a facilitative or an enforcement process. On  procedures for the Kyoto mechanisms, he highlighted views  expressed over the process and procedure for appeal,  including whether there would a new body or the COP/MOP  would be used. He noted general agreement on the need for a  true-up period and that a reference to a voluntary fund  would be made. On the outcomes or consequences of non- compliance or potential non-compliance, he said the  proposed consequence that would entail loss of ability to  transfer AAUs until a Party has demonstrated that it will  have a surplus would be elaborated. On the COP/MOP, he said  it would preserve its policy role. He added the Secretariat  would essentially channel information and service meetings  of the Compliance Institution. He said the headings on the  relationship with Articles 16 (MCP) and 19 (dispute  settlement) would be maintained and that the linkages with  the work undertaken in other contact groups needed to be  kept in mind.

SAUDI ARABIA said there was no consensus on the fact that  mechanisms were an issue to be dealt with at this stage. On  the outcomes of non-compliance, he suggested that a  reference to Article 18 (non-compliance) be included in a  footnote. He added that the policy guidance role of the  COP/MOP needed to be highlighted and that the role of the  subsidiary bodies had to be clarified. INDIA said that  Parties should adhere to the language in the Protocol and  keep in mind work undertaken in other contact groups. NEW  ZEALAND stressed the importance of including the concept of  appeal. He requested that the discussion over the loss of  ability to transfer AAUs until a Party has demonstrated  that it will have a surplus should be reflected, in  particular on whether having a surplus meant being in  compliance. The US requested that the distinctive nature of  the facilitative and enforcement components be clearly  reflected. SAMOA suggested incorporating a reference to  environmental integrity in the general provisions and, with  regard to the NEW ZEALAND proposal, said the post- verification approach, listed as a potential consequence of  non-compliance, needed to remain intact and not be mixed  with borrowing. The EU sought a reference to variations of  a compliance fund both under the true-up period and the  outcomes.

On future work, Co-Chair Slade said the Co-Chairs would  prepare by April a paper based on the proposed headings,  the discussions during the workshop as well as their  working paper resulting from the Montreux consultations. He  explained that the compliance group would intensify its  work during the week preceding SB-12, including through a  session on crosscutting issues. He added that the Co-Chairs  would endeavor to prepare by June a developed text that  could form the basis for negotiations during SB-12. SAUDI  ARABIA requested clarification over the relationship  between the work undertaken on the different elements of  the BAPA. Co-Chair Dovland said that although it was  difficult to guarantee an equal development within the  different groups, it seemed that the processes were making  similar progress. FCCC Executive Secretary Michael Zammit- Cutajar welcomed the fact that the group was addressing  inter-linkages between issues and took note of the concerns  over a balanced implementation of the BAPA. He said the COP  Bureau was discussing ways of ensuring forward movement on  all fronts. Co-Chair Slade brought the meeting to a close  at 12:00 noon on Friday, 3 March.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR BEFORE COP-6

### FCCC WORKSHOPS

A workshop on 'Initial actions relating to  the adverse effects of climate change, in accordance with  Articles 4.8 and 4.9 of the Convention' will be held from  9-11 March 2000 in Bonn. A workshop on 'Methodological  approaches and actions necessary under the FCCC and  relating to the impact of the implementation of response  measures in accordance with Article 4.8 and 4.9 of the  Convention and in the light of matters related to Article  3.14 of the Kyoto Protocol' will be held from 13-15 March  2000 in Bonn. A workshop on 'Issues related to Articles 5,  7 & 8 of the Kyoto Protocol' will be held from 14-16 March  2000 in Bonn. A workshop on 'Technology transfer for the  Latin America & the Caribbean region' will be held from 29- 31 March 2000 in El Salvador. A workshop on 'Best practices  in policies and measures' will be held from 11-13 April  2000 in Copenhagen. A workshop on 'Non-Annex I  communications for Latin America & the Caribbean region'  will be held from 1-5 May 2000 in Mexico City. For more  information, contact: the FCCC Secretariat; tel: +49-228- 815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail:  secretariat@unfccc.de; Internet:  http://www.unfccc.de/sessions/workhops.html

### SEATTLE SUMMIT ON PROTECTING THE WORLD'S CLIMATE

This  meeting will be held from 3-5 April 2000 in Seattle, USA.  The summit is being organized by the Climate Institute in  partnership with Climate Solutions. It aims to bring  together key individuals, including leaders in the  information and telecommunications revolutions of the last  two decades. For more information, contact: the Climate  Institute; tel: +1-202-547-0104; fax: +1-202-547-0111;  Internet: http://www.climate.org/seattlesummit

### PACIFIC ISLANDS CONFERENCE ON CLIMATE CHANGE, CLIMATE  VARIABILITY AND SEA LEVEL CHANGE

This meeting will be held  from 3-7 April 2000 in Rarotonga, Cook Islands. The meeting  is being organized by the South Pacific Regional  Environment Programme (SPREP), in partnership with the  National Tidal Facility, UNDP and GEF through the Pacific  Islands Climate Change Assistance Programme. For more  information, contact: SPREP; fax: +685-202-31; e-mail:  kaluwin@sprep.org.ws; Internet: http://www.sprep.org.ws

### CLIMATE POLICY WORKSHOP

FROM KYOTO TO THE HAGUE - EUROPEAN  PERSPECTIVES ON MAKING THE KYOTO PROTOCOL WORK: This  workshop will take place from 18-19 April 2000 in  Amsterdam, and is being organized by the European Forum on  Integrated Environmental Assessment. The workshop will  review scientific information relevant for the EU and its  member States in preparing for FCCC COP-6 and will aim to  enhance the policy relevance of climate-related research in  Europe. For more information, contact: Albert Faber, RIVM;  tel:+31-30-274-3683/3728; fax: +31-30-274-4435; e-mail:  albert.faber@rivm.nl; Internet:  http://www.vu.nl/english/o_o/instituten/IVM/research/efiea/ announce.htm

### CONFERENCE ON INNOVATIVE POLICY SOLUTIONS TO GLOBAL CLIMATE  CHANGE

This Conference will be held from 25-26 April 2000  in Washington DC. It is being co-hosted by the Pew Center  on Global Climate Change and the Royal Institute of  International Affairs. The meeting will consider innovative  policies currently being implemented by industrialized  country governments and the private sector to address  climate change. For more information, contact Michelle  Pilliod; tel: +1-202-544-7900; fax: +1-202-544-7922; e- mail: pilliodmp@aol.com; Internet:  http://www.pewclimate.org/forms/innov_conf.html

### 11TH GLOBAL WARMING INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE AND EXPO

This  meeting, entitled 'Kyoto Compliance Review - Year 2000  Conference,' will be held from 25-28 April 2000 in Boston.  It is being sponsored by the Global Warming International  Program Committee and the Global Warming International  Center. For more information, contact: Sinyan Shen; tel:  +1-630-910-1551; fax: +1-630-910-1561; e-mail:  syshen@megsinet.net; Internet:  http://globalwarming.net/gw11.html

### 12TH SESSION OF THE FCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES

SB-12 will be  held from 12-16 June 2000 in Bonn. It will be preceded by  one week of informal meetings, including workshops. For  more information, contact: the FCCC Secretariat; tel: +49- 228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail:  secretariat@unfccc.de; Internet:  http://www.unfccc.de/sessions/sessions.html

### FCCC 13TH SESSION OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES

SB-13 will be  held from 11-15 September 2000 in Bonn. It will be preceded  by one week of informal meetings, including workshops. For  more information, contact: the FCCC Secretariat.

### FCCC SIXTH CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES

COP-6 will be held  from 13-24 November 2000 in The Hague, the Netherlands. For  more information, contact: the FCCC Secretariat.