---
title: "SUMMARY OF THE UNFCCC WORKSHOP ON THE PREPARATION OF NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS FROM NON-ANNEX I PARTIES: 26-30 APRIL 2004"
id: enb12232e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12232e
date: 2004-04-30
abstract: "The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)  workshop on the preparation of national communications from  non-Annex I Parties was held from 26-30 April 2004, in Manila, the  Philippines. The workshop brought together 88 participants  representing 50 countries and 13 organizations, including  non-governmental and intergovernmental organizations, and UN  organizations, including UNDP and UNEP. The event was organized by  the UNFCCC Secretariat and the Department of Environment and  Natural Resources (DENR) of the Philippines, in collaboration with  UNDP Philippines and the Asia-Pacific Network for Global Change  Research (APN). Funding for the workshop was provided by the  Governments of Spain, Switzerland, the US and APN."
---

The workshop provided an opportunity to inform non-Annex I Parties  on the application of the revised Guidelines for the preparation  of non-Annex I national communications adopted at COP-8 in 2002,  and the Guidelines user manual developed by the UNFCCC  Secretariat. It also provided an opportunity to exchange  information on financial and technical support, including  information on the procedures for accessing financial resources  and support for preparing national communications from the Global  Environment Facility (GEF) and its implementing agencies. Finally,  the workshop aimed to identify other specific needs and concerns  relating to the preparation of national communications, and ways  to overcome these.

Throughout the week, workshop participants attended 11 plenary  sessions on relevant issues, including: national circumstances;  national greenhouse gas (GHG) inventories; measures to facilitate  adequate adaptation to climate change; measures to mitigate  climate change; other information relevant to the UNFCCC;  constraints and gaps, and related financial, technical and  capacity needs; the development of project proposals for funding  second national communications; relevant regional and multi- country projects and programmes; multilateral and regional support  programmes; and bilateral support programmes.

The workshop discussions resulted in agreement on a series of  recommendations on non-Annex I national communications that will  be submitted as part of the report of the workshop for  consideration at the twentieth sessions of the UNFCCC's Subsidiary  Bodies (SB-20), scheduled for June 2004 in Bonn, Germany.  The  workshop was immediately followed by a meeting of the Consultative  Group of Experts on non-Annex I national communications (CGE), who  were expected to discuss the training programmes, support and  technical assistance required by non-Annex I Parties in preparing  their second national communications, based on outcomes at the  workshop.

This report summarizes the discussions at the workshop, organized  according to the workshop agenda.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF NON-ANNEX I REPORTING UNDER THE UNFCCC

### UNFCCC

The international political response to climate change  took shape with the adoption of the UNFCCC, which entered into  force in 1994. The UNFCCC sets out a framework for action aimed at  stabilizing atmospheric GHG concentrations at a level that would  prevent human-induced actions from leading to 'dangerous  interference' with the climate system. Under the UNFCCC, all  Parties are required to provide regular reports on the steps they  are taking to implement the UNFCCC.

### NON-ANNEX I NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS

Consistent with the principle  of 'common but differentiated responsibilities,' the content and  timetable for submitting these reports - or 'national  communications' - varies depending on whether the country is an  'Annex I' (industrialized countries and most economies in  transition) or 'non-Annex I' (mostly developing countries) Party.  Due to their circumstances, the UNFCCC granted non-Annex I Parties  a more flexible timetable for preparing and submitting their  national communications. Most non-Annex I Parties must submit  their first national communications within three years of becoming  Parties to the UNFCCC. Although the least developed countries  (LDCs) are entitled to make their initial communications 'at their  discretion.' Non-Annex I Parties are eligible for financial and  technical assistance from the GEF for preparing these national  communications. In addition, other donors and agencies have also  provided assistance.

Building on the provisions in the UNFCCC, further work on  non-Annex I Parties' national communications was completed at the  second Conference of the Parties (COP-2) held in Geneva in July  1996. At COP-2, delegates agreed on the substance that should be  contained in national communications, and set out guidelines for  such communications (decision 10/CP.2).

### THE CONSULTATIVE GROUP OF EXPERTS

At COP-5, Parties decided to  initiate a process to review the reporting guidelines agreed at  COP-2 and to improve the preparation of non-Annex I national  communications (decision 8/CP.5). To facilitate this process, the  COP established a Consultative Group of Experts on national  communications from non-Annex I Parties (CGE). The COP decided  that the CGE should be composed of five experts from each of the  developing country regions (Africa, Asia and the Pacific, and  Latin America and the Caribbean), six experts from Annex I  Parties, and three experts from organizations with relevant  experience. At COP-7 in 2001, delegates agreed to continue the  process of reviewing the guidelines in accordance with decision  8/CP.5.

### THE REVISED GUIDELINES

At COP-8, Parties adopted revised  Guidelines for the preparation of non-Annex I national  communications (decision 17/CP.8). At COP-9, held in late 2003,  Parties identified a need for continued financial and technical  support to enhance national capacities in non-Annex I Parties to  prepare their second, and where appropriate, third national  communications.

To date, 112 out of 148 non-Annex I Parties have submitted their  initial national communications. Mexico and the Republic of Korea  have also submitted their second national communications. Other  Parties are currently undertaking this task, based on the  Guidelines adopted at COP-8, and supported by the CGE.

# REPORT OF THE WORKSHOP SESSION ONE

### OPENING ADDRESSES

On Monday morning, 26 April, Elisea Gozun, Secretary of DENR, the  Philippines, opened the meeting. She thanked the UNFCCC  Secretariat, UNDP Philippines, and the APN, as well as the  Governments of Spain, Switzerland, and the US, for co-sponsoring  this event. She stressed the need for urgent and coordinated  action on climate change.

Deborah Landey, UNDP Resident Representative for the Philippines,  stressed UNDP's commitment, along with the GEF and UNEP, to  support developing countries' implementation of multilateral  agreements. She indicated that the workshop was a timely  opportunity to increase developing country capacity to submit  their national communications, in light of the revised reporting  Guidelines. Noting that the GHG inventory is at the heart of every  national communication report, she stressed the need to support  this process.

Celso Diaz, Scientific Planning Group Member of the Philippines  for APN, outlined the work of APN, which is an intergovernmental  regional network. Explaining that APN is involved in various  capacity-building initiatives, he reported progress on the  Scientific Capacity Building and Enhancement for Sustainable  Development in Developing Countries initiative (CAPaBLE), a  capacity-building partnership project launched in 2003 that aims  to build and enhance capacity among leading and aspiring  scientists in developing countries, and to disseminate science to  decision makers and civil society.

Luis Gómez-Echeverri, Coordinator of the Implementation Programme  and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI), UNFCCC  Secretariat, expressed satisfaction at the large number of Parties  and organizations represented at the workshop. Observing that 2004  was the tenth anniversary of the UNFCCC's entry into force, he  said the next decade would involve a strong focus on  implementation. He emphasized the importance of national  communications in this regard, and explained that this workshop  would help launch the second round of non-Annex I national  communications.

Martha Perdomo, Manager of the non-Annex I Implementation  Subprogramme, UNFCCC Secretariat, said Julian Amador, Director of  the Environmental Management Bureau of the Philippines, would  chair the meeting, assisted by Jose Villarin of the Manila  Observatory, and Joyceline Goco, Head of the Inter-Agency  Committee on Climate Change of the Philippines. Rapporteurs of the  workshop were: Philip Acquah (Ghana), for the session on GHG  inventories; Gwendoline Sissiou (Papua New Guinea), for the  session on adaptation; Jae-Kyu Lim (Republic of Korea), for the  session on climate change mitigation; Julia Martinez Fernandez  (Mexico), for the sessions on other information and on constraints  and gaps; and Rawleston Moore (Barbados), for the sessions on  financial and technical support.

# SESSION TWO

### NATIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES

On Monday, delegates considered the status of non-Annex I Parties  in preparing their national communications. Introducing the  revised UNFCCC reporting Guidelines, Martha Perdomo, UNFCCC  Secretariat, highlighted the importance of effective national  institutional arrangements to ensure continuity in the process of  preparing communications and noted that several countries have  established National Committees on Climate Change to prepare these  reports. Perdomo indicated that 112 (or 71%) of non-Annex I  Parties have submitted their first communications, including over  60% of the LDCs, and said submissions of national communications  from India, China and Brazil are nearing completion. Regarding  second national communications, she said these have been submitted  by Mexico and the Republic of Korea. She noted that Uruguay has  almost completed its second report, and will be the first to  submit a communication based on the revised Guidelines. She said  Argentina and Costa Rica have also begun preparing their second  communications. She informed delegates that a synthesis report of  the national communications of 99 non-Annex I countries, presented  by the Secretariat at COP-9, had helped identify methodological,  institutional and financial problems encountered in preparing  communications. Some of these problems had been addressed in the  revised UNFCCC Guidelines, which also take into consideration  earlier COP decisions. She noted that the next synthesis document  will be prepared in 2005.

Graham Sem, UNFCCC Secretariat, provided an overview of how to  report on national circumstances in non-Annex I national  communications. He drew attention to the key elements required in  preparing the reports, including information on: development  priorities, objectives and circumstances; formats, summaries,  maps, tables and charts; institutional arrangements; and reference  materials and sources of these materials. He highlighted the lack  of clarity on institutional responsibilities as an inhibiting  factor in finalizing national communications, particularly where a  large number of stakeholders are involved.

# SESSION THREE

### NATIONAL GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORIES

On Monday, participants discussed national GHG inventories, which  they stressed constitute a major part of national communications.  Presentations were delivered on a number of relevant topics,  including: reporting of national GHG inventories; the revised 1996  Reporting Guidelines of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate  Change (IPCC), and the IPCC inventory software; IPCC good practice  guidance and uncertainty management in national GHG inventories;  the emission factor database (EFDB); IPCC good practice guidance  for land use, land-use change, and forestry (LULUCF); and two case  studies of national experiences in elaborating GHG inventories.  Participants also engaged in a general discussion on inventories.

Dominique Revet, UNFCCC Secretariat, discussed technical  developments in GHG inventory reporting. He highlighted various  new developments, including the adoption of the Revised 1996 IPCC  Reporting Guidelines and UNFCCC Guidelines for the preparation of  national communications from non-Annex I Parties (decision  17/CP.8), and completion of a UNFCCC manual for the Guidelines on  preparing non-Annex I communications. He also drew attention to  the development by the UNFCCC Secretariat of a modified version of  the IPCC GHG inventory software to be released in late 2004, and  acceptance by the IPCC in 2003 of the good practice guidance for  LULUCF, and the IPCC EFDB. Revet provided a detailed account of  the revised Guidelines for preparing non-Annex I national  communications from COP-8, which included information on  methodologies and reporting procedures.

Kiyoto Tanabe, IPCC, briefed participants on the Revised 1996 IPCC  Reporting Guidelines and accompanying inventory software. He  outlined the work of the IPCC's National Greenhouse Gas Inventory  Programme, including the various reports and tools it has prepared  since 1995 to assist in the preparation of national GHG  inventories. He informed delegates that the IPCC has started work  on revising the 1996 Guidelines by 2006.

Leandro Buendia, IPCC, spoke about good practice guidance and  uncertainty management in national GHG inventories, which had been  addressed in an IPCC report published in 2000. He outlined the  report's guidance on how to reduce uncertainties and increase  accuracy, transparency, comparability, and consistency over time.  He detailed various methodological issues, including how to  identify key sources of emissions - known as 'key source  categories.' He explained that countries can take quantitative or  qualitative approaches to identifying key source categories.

Tanabe then presented the EFDB, a database of 'emission factors,'  which are indicative emissions that take into account local  conditions. He indicated that the aim of the EFDB is to save time  and resources in countries that lack emission factors for certain  sectors by providing easy access to such data from other countries  with similar conditions. Tanabe invited contributions to the  database, which will be evaluated by an EFDB editorial board prior  to their use.

Leandro Buendia then briefed participants on the IPCC's good  practice guidance for LULUCF, accepted by the IPCC prior to COP-9,  which he said aims to provide guidance on how to undertake  inventories in the forestry, agriculture and land use sectors.  Buendia explained that past IPCC guidance had not covered LULUCF  activities, as they were being discussed in the context of the  IPCC Special Report on LULUCF. He indicated that the good practice  guidance aims to provide guidance on the choice of methods  available to estimate LULUCF inventories within the context of the  IPCC guidelines. It also provides data and information on sources  and sinks, and estimated levels of carbon dioxide emissions for  LULUCF activities.

Following the IPCC presentations, participants were briefed on two  case studies relating to GHG inventories. Jose Villarin, Manila  Observatory, outlined the experience of the Philippines in  addressing issues of resource assessment for its first national  communication. In particular, he reported on various technical,  human, institutional and financial gaps and obstacles hindering  this work. Identifying key technical issues, he noted challenges  relating to information management, networking and communication,  training, archiving and research. Regarding gaps in human  capacity, he highlighted the need to secure effective management  and leadership, and to develop a critical mass of sector-specific  expertise. On institutional issues, he stressed the value of a  legal framework to facilitate information sharing among government  agencies, while on financial issues, he highlighted questions of  funding allocation, including the cost-effectiveness of outsourcing.

Samuel Adejuwon, Federal Ministry of the Environment of Nigeria,  briefed participants on his country's experience in preparing the  GHG inventory for its first national communication, submitted in  November 2003. Focusing on the resources available for this work,  he drew attention to the various sources of data, information, and  financial and technical support.

Participants then discussed ways to disseminate the EFDB, as well  as criteria to establish consistency between methodologies  developed at the national level and those recommended by the IPCC.  Speaking for the IPCC, Kiyoto Tanabe responded that, while  national methodologies are encouraged, it is difficult to define  general criteria to judge their consistency with IPCC  methodologies. The World Meteorological Organization (WMO)  suggested that developing countries should highlight their own  contributions to the preparation of national communications, so as  to encourage donors. Graham Sem, UNFCCC Secretariat, informed  participants that the revised Guidelines include a section on  contributions made by non-Annex I countries in 'cash and kind,'  towards the preparation of their national communications.

# SESSION FOUR

### ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE

Throughout the day on Tuesday, 27 April, participants considered  reporting on measures to facilitate adequate adaptation to climate  change. In the morning, presentations addressed adaptation  measures, methodologies, policy frameworks, guidelines, tools, and  programmes of action. In the afternoon, participants heard  presentations and participated in a panel discussion on the UNDP  Adaptation Policy Framework (APF).

Graham Sem, UNFCCC Secretariat, presented on information to be  provided on vulnerability and adaptation (V&A) in national  communications, as defined in the revised UNFCCC Guidelines on  non-Annex I national communications. This should include  information on, inter alia, the adverse affects of climate change,  critically vulnerable areas, the adaptation measures required, and  national and regional programmes to facilitate adaptation. Sem  pointed out that, in addition to internationally-agreed guidelines  such as the IPCC technical guidelines for assessing climate change  impacts and adaptation, Parties are free to use methodologies  developed nationally or regionally, provided they are consistent,  transparent, and well documented. He observed that the UNFCCC  Guidelines call for an evaluation of identified adaptation  strategies and measures.

Isabelle Niang Diop, University of Dakar, Senegal, spoke about the  methodologies and frameworks developed to undertake V&A  assessments. She outlined the 'first generation' of methodologies  and frameworks, including the 1994 IPCC Technical Guidelines, as  well as subsequent methodologies derived from these. She also drew  attention to an alternative approach, known as the 'vulnerability- resilience approach' - that was applied by some small island  developing States, and reflected a greater focus on traditional  knowledge. Niang Diop then elaborated on the 'second generation'  of methodologies developed in recent years, including the UNDP  APF, the LDC national adaptation programmes of action (NAPAs), and  the UK Climate Impacts Programme. She explained that these newer  methodologies were less prescriptive, placed adaptation within a  broader development context, included a greater focus on  stakeholder participation, and took into account current  conditions, as well as future vulnerability.

Xianfu Lu, Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research, UK,  discussed the modeling of climate change impacts and response  measures. She described V&A impact assessment as one component of  an integrated climate change framework. She explained that state- of-the art modeling involves process-based biophysical impact  methods, transient climate change and sea-level rise scenarios,  refined socioeconomic baselines, and high resolution data.  However, she stressed that gaps remain in modeling approaches,  including a mismatch between global and local impact assessment  models, inadequate data (including climate data), insufficient  methods and tools to model extremes events, and abstract or  overly-complex models. She noted that, while climate models have  previously focused on biophysical processes, the integration of  macroeconomic impacts and other human dimensions of global change  are also needed. She suggested that to effect changes in the 'real  world,' V&A assessments should address the needs of a broader  range of stakeholder groups. This would require model developers  to, inter alia: address short- or medium-term variability; make  models accessible to a wider range of stakeholders; and integrate  climate change modeling impacts into planning across levels of  decision-making. She concluded that modeling was only one approach  to assess impacts and response measures to climate change.

Olga Pilifosova, UNFCCC Secretariat, described the work of the  Secretariat in collecting and disseminating information on methods  and tools to assess climate impacts and V&A measures in a  Compendium that was first developed in 1999, and updated in 2003.  She explained that, with the Compendium, the Secretariat had  sought to enhance dissemination of such methods, encourage  application of best available methods, and improve the quality of  these methodologies. She noted that the Compendium was not  prescriptive, but provided users with the information needed to  make their own choices. She also presented the results of an  expert meeting held in Manila on 25-26 April 2004, where users  proposed further additions and improvements to the compendium.

Madeleine Diouf, Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources,  Senegal, briefed participants on NAPAs, focusing on the immediate  needs and concerns of LDCs, including technical requirements, and  resource mobilization. She outlined the NAPA process, which she  said was designed to respond to the urgent needs of LDCs. She  explained that preparing a NAPA takes 12-18 months, costs  US$200,000, and requires external financial resources. Diouf  identified an increase in vector- and water-borne diseases,  flooding, biodiversity loss, and desertification as key  consequences of climate change in LDCs. She stressed that NAPAs  help identify and prioritize options and tools to address such  problems.

In the ensuing discussion participants drew attention to the  PRECIS regional impact assessment model developed by the UK's  Hadley Centre and asked about its status. UNDP informed  participants that the model and an accompanying workbook would be  made available at SB-20.

Replying to a question from Burkina Faso about funding assistance  for preparing NAPAs, Madeleine Diouf stated that a number of  countries working through UNEP had already received financing.  UNDP acknowledged that there had been a delay in disbursing funds  to countries working through UNDP due to 'administrative  problems.' Martha Perdomo, UNFCCC Secretariat, indicated that many  of the numerous resources available on national communications  would be compiled into a CD-ROM that would be distributed at the  end of this workshop.

On Tuesday afternoon, the session on adaptation resumed with a  presentation from William Dougherty, Stockholm Environment  Institute (SEI)-Boston, who provided an overview of the UNDP APF  and its outputs. He explained that the APF aims to build  'resilience' and help communities cope with climate change. He  stated that the APF places adaptation within a development context  by building on existing adaptation activities, recognizing that  adaptation is required at different levels - in particular at the  local level, and acknowledging that adaptation is a continuous  process. Operationally, he explained that the APF looks at  coordination and implementation and aims to be flexible. It can be  tailored to suit national priorities and the key vulnerable  systems identified in each country, and takes a stakeholder-driven  approach. Dougherty reported that APF outputs include a resource  'package,' which contains a guidebook to facilitate the APF  planning process, as well as nine technical papers, a five-module  training package and an illustrative set of case studies. He  indicated that the APF's first phase, which ended in early 2004,  had completed the framework and was aiming to put in place an APF  Training Strategy. Phase two will follow shortly with a new series  of technical papers.

Presenting an overview of the APF Training Strategy, Dougherty  told participants that it utilizes a technique of Continuous  Professional Development (CPD), and goes beyond conventional  five-day training workshops. CPD is intended for longer durations,  and customized material will be provided for different professional  groups. There will also be an emphasis on local ownership of  outcomes, as well as stronger feedback and evaluation mechanisms.  Dougherty added that CPD will focus on three major areas - food  security, water and health - along with the crosscutting issue of  sustainable livelihoods.

Luis Paz Castro, Institute of Meteorology, Cuba, presented his  perspective on the APF in the context of second national  communications, focusing on initiatives occurring in Central  America and the Caribbean. Noting that this is the pilot region  for elaborating and applying the APF, he described Cuba's  involvement in an APF pilot project on Capacity Building for Stage  II Adaptation to Climate Change in Central America, Mexico and  Cuba (Stage II activities are measures which may be taken to  prepare for adaptation, including further capacity building). The  project aims to strengthen the adaptive capacity of the human  system to reduce vulnerability to climate change. He then outlined  the synergies and coordination achieved between this project and  others in the region. Reflecting on Cuba's experiences with the  pilot project, he drew several conclusions, including that  adaptation is a process that should begin with a reduction of  vulnerability to current climate variability. He also stressed the  need for cooperation, emphasizing that a single country does not  possess the capacity and experience needed to develop all the  necessary policies and actions to adapt to climate variability and  climate change.

### PANEL DISCUSSION

Following the presentations, a panel of experts  from the APF pilot region engaged in discussion with participants  on training needs and national experiences in implementing the  APF. The panel included Luis Paz Castro, William Dougherty, and  Eduardo Reyes (Panama). Reyes shared his experiences of the  regional pilot project regarding vulnerability indicators in  watersheds. He identified several drawbacks to the APF, including  the lack of clear social vulnerability indicators, insufficient  guidance on the elaboration of project outputs, and a limited  conceptual framework of vulnerability. On lessons learned he  emphasized that future APF projects will require adequate funds to  implement stakeholder consultation.

Samoa asked panelists about the expected project outputs and how  the stakeholder process was implemented. Reyes replied that  outputs would include vulnerability maps, which might help to  determine future vulnerability. On stakeholder involvement, he  noted that costs were too high to undertake in-depth consultation.  Burkina Faso asked if the APF could be implemented at any stage in  the preparation of national communications. Paz Castro replied  that it could be, given the APF's flexibility. Dougherty said  UNDP/GEF intended to hold workshops in the pilot project region  and develop a list of common 'pressing' vulnerabilities in the  region. They will also design a set of group exercises directly  related to needs assessment.

Nigeria raised the issue of replicating the pilot project in  Africa and other regions. On the question of funding for  adaptation, UNDP noted that GEF is working on operationalizing an  adaptation funding window that will have US$50 million in the next  budget cycle (2005-2007). Coupled with the UNFCCC Special Climate  Change Fund that is expected to become operational in 2004, these  represent the first steps of a process designed to make funding  available for adaptation. On a question from the South Pacific  Regional Environment Programme (SPREP) about the status of the  APF, Dougherty described it as a coherent, accessible and credible  framework for adaptation needs. UNDP supported the APF as one  useful approach that could be applied in various circumstances,  while noting that it might not be applicable to every situation.

# SESSION FIVE

### MEASURES TO MITIGATE CLIMATE CHANGE

On Wednesday morning, 28 April, delegates considered reporting on  measures to mitigate climate change, with presentations covering  issues such as: mitigation programmes; methodologies, technical  resources and guidelines; and data, information, financial and  technical services, and support. The session concluded with a  general discussion.

Dominique Revet, UNFCCC Secretariat, opened the session with a  presentation reporting on national mitigation programmes in the  national communications. Noting that the original COP-2 decision  on non-Annex I national communications had contained very little  guidance on this issue, he explained that the COP-8 Guidelines had  set out further guidance. Revet then elaborated on the four  paragraphs on mitigation reporting contained in the Guidelines  (paragraphs 37-40). These paragraphs contain information and  guidance describing the benefits of mitigation measures, the  methodological approaches and models available for mitigation  assessments, the technical resources involved in such assessments,  and the value of sector- and project-specific information.

Revet then outlined the methodologies, technical resources and  guidelines available for reporting on mitigation programmes,  pointing out that the first step involves choosing from a range of  'bottom-up' and 'top-down' methodologies available for mitigation  analysis. He described the available options and processes for  evaluating national social and economic development frameworks for  climate change mitigation, baseline scenario projections,  mitigation scenario projections, macroeconomic scenarios and  implementation issues. In the discussion that followed, Revet  highlighted the value of revisiting the mitigation analysis  carried out in first national communications, in order to update  their information and analysis. The Philippines noted the  importance of financial and technical capacity development in  conducting the analysis.

Vute Wangwacharakul, Department of Agricultural and Resource  Economics, Kasetsart University, Thailand, briefed participants on  the process involved in preparing Thailand's first national  communication. Focusing on the reporting on mitigation activities,  he began by identifying the strengths and weaknesses in the  process of preparing the first communication, noting that on the  financial and technical aspects, Thailand had benefited from  numerous multilateral and bilateral programmes, including UNDP/GEF  country programmes, as well as relevant national sectoral  development plans and economic analyses. However, he also observed  that comprehensive data on specific sectors was largely absent and  that accessing information sources had been problematic.  Wangwacharakul emphasized the advantages of subcontracting experts  from local universities and non-governmental organizations, while  engaging international experts as and when needed. He reported  that the preparation of Thailand's second national communication  required additional stocktaking and the inclusion of the  agriculture and livestock sectors. Wangwacharakul concluded that  the preparation of non-Annex I communications was a 'capacity- building process' that was largely dependent on the availability  of financial resources and the effective use of existing national  and regional capacities. He added that the process also hinged on  adequate opportunities to combine capacity between sectoral and  climate change experts, the potential to improve modeling  capacity, and the availability of support from multilateral  agencies and bilateral donors.

Julia Martínez Fernández, Ministry for the Environment, Mexico,  briefed participants on her country's mitigation policies and  activities. Noting that Mexico's second national communication  includes various mitigation policies, she reported on mitigation  activities in key sectors, including projects to develop combined  cycle power plants, industrial cogeneration, renewable energy,  efficient lighting in homes, efficient air conditioning equipment,  reforestation projects, and energy efficiency at PEMEX, the  government-owned oil company. Noting the environmental, economic  and health benefits of mitigation projects, she observed that  Mexico has now decoupled emissions growth from economic growth.

The morning session ended with a general discussion. Responding to  a question from Iran about the drop in energy intensity in Mexico  in the late 1990s, Martínez said this was because of a devaluation  of the Peso in 1995. Barbados raised concerns that the revised  UNFCCC Guidelines increased the information requirements,  expertise and resources needed to prepare the second national  communication, as compared to the first communication.  Wangwacharakul agreed that the quality of technical information in  the second national communication would depend on the resources  available. Responding to a question on the length of the national  communications, Revet and Philip Weech, UNFCCC Secretariat, said  this would be decided by national governments, but added that the  Secretariat would need some background information to compile the  synthesis report.

# SESSION SIX

### OTHER INFORMATION

On Wednesday afternoon, participants heard presentations on other  information considered relevant to the UNFCCC in the context of  non-Annex I national communications. These covered several  specific areas, including: research and systematic observation;  the development and transfer of technologies; education, training  and public awareness, and capacity building; and information and  networking. Participants also engaged in a general discussion.

Philip Weech, UNFCCC Secretariat, presented an overview of other  information relevant to the UNFCCC. He explained that 'other  information' relates to UNFCCC Article 12.1, which calls for the  inclusion of any other information relevant to the achievement of  the objectives of the UNFCCC in Parties' national communications.  Other information is also prioritized in the revised UNFCCC  Guidelines (paragraph 41). He concluded by emphasizing the need  for financial and technical support in the preparation of national  communications, particularly in the area of capacity building.

Olga Pilifosova, UNFCCC Secretariat, spoke about research and  systematic observation, focusing on the reporting requirements  contained in the UNFCCC Guidelines. On systematic observation, she  informed participants of various UNFCCC decisions aimed at  strengthening the Global Climate Observing System (GCOS). She then  outlined the UNFCCC Guidelines' requirements for reporting on GCOS  activities. On the issue of research programmes, she highlighted  the relevant part of the UNFCCC Guidelines, and drew attention to  the user manual on research and systematic observation. Finally,  she noted that the eighteenth session of the Subsidiary Body for  Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) had initiated two new  relevant agenda items, on 'scientific, technical and socioeconomic  aspects of impacts of, and vulnerability and adaptation to,  climate change,' and on 'scientific, technical and socioeconomic  aspects of mitigation.' These issues would be addressed in  workshops and side events planned for SBSTA-20.

Yolando Velasco, UNFCCC Secretariat, spoke about reporting on  capacity building, technology transfer, and education, training  and public awareness. He pointed out that these are crosscutting,  closely related issues, and that there is the possibility of  duplicating activities when assessing needs under each of them. He  observed that while the scope of countries' capacity-building  needs could easily cover almost everything related to climate  change, Parties should try to identify clear priorities. On  technology transfer, Velasco identified five areas: technology  needs assessment, information related to technology, enabling  environments, capacity building, and mechanisms for technology  transfer. He said around 80 Parties were involved in technology  needs assessments. He drew attention to the New Delhi Work  Programme on UNFCCC Article 6 (education, training, and public  awareness) that was now being implemented, and indicated that  regional workshops were being conducted to identify Parties'  specific needs. He concluded by highlighting the need for  country-driven stakeholder involvement, and for developing  synergies and interlinkages.

Jack Fitzgerald, US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), briefed  participants on the UNFCCC Guidelines' reporting requirements on  information and networking. According to the Guidelines (paragraph  48), 'non-Annex I Parties are encouraged to provide information on  their efforts to promote information sharing among and within  counties and regions.' However, Fitzgerald explained that  non-Annex I Parties had faced problems accessing information and  identifying networks in the preparation of their national  communications, due in part to the absence of national scientific  and technical expertise, and to difficulties in accessing  international networks. On information sharing, he suggested that  Parties should explore creative forms of communication, and  illustrated an example of the US Climate Technology Cooperation  and Gateway website, which provides links to computer models, such  as LEAP - a software tool for integrated energy, environment and  GHG mitigation analysis. Fitzgerald concluded by highlighting that  Parties faced a dilemma of global 'information overload,' while  they were also challenged with accessing, updating and  manipulating information at the national level.

In the subsequent discussion, participants raised issues of  technology needs assessments, capacity building, and public  awareness. Participants discussed at length on technology needs  assessments, including how these relate to second national  communications. Martha Perdomo, UNFCCC Secretariat, encouraged  Parties to submit their technology needs assessments officially to  the Secretariat. Thailand informed participants of a proposal to  include information on technology needs assessments on the  TT:Clear website, which is an information clearing house on  technology transfer issues. He also observed that the level of  funding provided for these assessments had placed limits on how  much work was possible.

Peru suggested that not enough progress had been made on public  awareness, which she felt would be critical over the next few  years. Kenya agreed, noting that her country's efforts in this  area had been hampered by a lack of funding.

# SESSION SEVEN

### CONSTRAINTS AND GAPS, AND RELATED FINANCIAL,  TECHNICAL AND CAPACITY NEEDS

Late on Wednesday afternoon, participants considered constraints  and gaps, and related financial, technical and capacity needs  relevant to the preparation of second national communications.

Philip Weech, UNFCCC Secretariat, observed that, as part of their  national communications, non-Annex I Parties are required to  provide a list of projects that they are proposing for financing.  He noted that, although such lists were included in the first  national communications by many non-Annex I Parties, the proposals  had not yet been considered for funding. He said the Secretariat  is working on a paper for consideration at COP-10, to address the  issue of project funding under non-Annex I national  communications. Weech then informed participants on the process of  submitting national communications, pointing out that they should  be in one of the UN languages, and should include an executive  summary. Additional supporting information can be added as  technical annexes.

A general discussion ensued, during which a representative of the  WMO emphasized the need for non-Annex I Parties to maintain  inventories of experts and resource people trained in preparing  national communications.

# SESSION EIGHT

### DEVELOPMENT OF PROPOSALS FOR PREPARING SECOND  NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS

On Thursday morning, 29 April, participants were briefed on the  development of proposals for preparing second national  communications. The briefings were given by officials from UNDP  and UNEP, the two GEF implementing agencies involved in supporting  the process of preparing national communications. Their  presentations covered a variety of relevant issues, including  lessons learned during the process of preparing first national  communications, and the approach to be taken while preparing or  submitting proposals for second national communications. There was  also a general discussion on the issue.

Ravi Sharma, UNEP, opened the session, looking at lessons learned  during the first national communications process. He highlighted  the need for appropriate technical support and easy access to  methodologies and tools in preparing GHG inventories, as well as  the benefits of regional workshops. He also stressed the need to  improve project management and coordination at the national level,  and the importance of transparency, stakeholder involvement and  awareness-raising. Effective data management and sustaining  capacity in terms of the expertise developed during the first  national communications process were also seen as critical for  preparing second communications. Identifying lessons learned for  the implementing agencies, Sharma highlighted proposals to improve  monitoring and evaluation, take advantage of best practices and  make use of them in a systematic way, and exploit linkages and  synergies with other relevant projects.

Rebecca Carman, UNDP, outlined the approach that will be taken to  support non-Annex I Parties in preparing their second national  communications. She explained that it would involve a joint  GEF/UNDP/UNEP programme with a budget of US$60.2 million. The  programme would run from 2004-09, and was expected to involve 130  non-Annex I Parties. The new approach was intended to help  streamline and expedite the process, and to improve monitoring,  evaluation, and the support services available to countries.  Carman explained that this approach would involve three  components: a self-assessment process; preparation of the national  communication itself; and a National Communications Support  Programme (NCSP). Countries will be able to access US$15,000 for  the self-assessment, and up to US$405,000 for the national  communication. She also noted that project approval had been  decentralized from the GEF Secretariat to UNDP and UNEP, which  should expedite the release of funds.

Yamil Bonduki, UNDP, summarized the key features of the revised  GEF Operational Procedures for funding the preparation of second  national communications. He also described UNDP procedures for  requesting and approving funding for preparing communications, and  reported on UNDP's experience in reviewing funding proposals. He  explained that the GEF Operational Procedures had been revised to:  facilitate broader stakeholder participation; build on previous  work, activities and knowledge; capture best practices; and  develop linkages with other relevant projects. He informed  delegates that under the new expedited route for accessing GEF  funds to prepare national communications, the processing time for  proposals was expected to be no more than 15 days. He noted that  UNDP had already received approximately 22 proposals, most of  which followed the template provided by UNDP, with only minor  changes needed.

In the discussion that followed, Bonduki informed participants  that UNDP was in the process of finalizing a format for proposals,  and would work closely with a few countries to develop model  proposals. Answering a question from Nigeria on whether the  US$405,000 was the minimum or maximum amount countries could apply  for, Bonduki said it was the maximum using the expedited process,  but countries could choose to apply for a full-sized GEF project  instead, in which case the amount could be higher. However, the  procedures would be more complicated, and the process would take  more time.

Bonduki then briefed participants on the development of funding  proposals for national communications. He said development of  proposals should involve a stocktaking exercise to identify gaps  and uncertainties encountered in the first national  communications, such as constraints encountered in V&A  assessments. He also recommended that proposals should take into  account existing national priorities and ongoing activities such  as NAPAs, and should contain clear and achievable targets. He  advised that proposals should not overestimate the national  capacity available for the preparation of second national  communications.

Participants then engaged in a question-and-answer session with  UNDP and UNEP officials on their presentations. Barbados  reiterated the choice that countries face between using the  expedited process for funding their second national  communications, or using the regular GEF project cycle. He pointed  out that countries that take the US$15,000 for the self-assessment  must use the expedited process. Burkina Faso expressed concerns  that the US$405,000 allocated for second communications using the  expedited process should be a flexible rather than a fixed amount,  and Nigeria questioned whether this level of funding would be  adequate for every country.

Carman then briefed participants on the GEF/UNDP/UNEP NCSP, one of  the components of the strategy to support second national  communications, with a budget of US$5.5 million. She said UNDP is  committed to raising US$1.5 million in co-financing for the  programme. NCSP will provide country-driven technical assistance  to all non-Annex I Parties when preparing their national  communications by, inter alia, sharing knowledge and promoting  capacity building through the exchange of experiences, preparing  and disseminating technical materials, and facilitating  communication.

Ravi Sharma added some insights into UNEP's role, observing that  NCSP would seek to be more interactive than it had been in the  past. He listed UNEP activities relevant to NCSP, including the  LDC Technical Support Programme, the Coastal Zone Management  support for African islands, and the Global Network on Energy for  Sustainable Development.

# SESSION NINE

### REGIONAL AND MULTI-COUNTRY PROJECTS AND PROGRAMMES

On Thursday afternoon, participants considered projects and  programmes in several different regions.

Luis Santos, Uruguay's Ministry of Housing, Territorial Regulation  and Environment, briefed participants on the preparation of  Uruguay's second national communication. He explained that the  process had engaged governmental, non-governmental, academic and  business stakeholders over a period of 18 months. Significant  institutional challenges had been overcome and stakeholders had  supported the establishment of a new national institution called  PRONAVEN, a public-private entity that aims to encourage  co-management activities. Santos provided details on the contents  of Uruguay's national communication, which also presents the  national GHG inventory for 2000. Mitigation measures outlined in  the national communication are aimed at optimizing the country's  transport sector, as well as improving the agriculture, forestry,  waste and energy sectors. On adaptation measures, he drew  attention to national efforts to protect biodiversity, noting the  country's new national legislation on protected areas. Santos  stated that Uruguay had focused on institutional strengthening and  developing a programme for climate change information  dissemination, public awareness and education. He concluded by  underscoring the importance of participation across multiple  sectors and levels of decision-making when preparing national  communications.

In the ensuing discussion, Sudan enquired about the stakeholders  involved in preparing Uruguay's national communications, and how  national institutional capacity had been assessed. Santos  responded that 100 stakeholders from government, civil society,  academic, and private institutions has been involved in the  process. He rated the institutional performance as high.  Responding to a question from Iran on the extent to which  Uruguay's national communication reflected national development  plans, Santos explained that its communication included some  national plans, such as the introduction of bio-diesel, but would  benefit from additional links. In response to a question on how  Uruguay had addressed gaps in its first national communication,  Santos said it had been necessary to secure further sectoral  involvement in preparing the second communication.

Katarina Mareckova, UNDP, provided information on a regional  project for Capacity Building for Improving the Quality of  Greenhouse Gas Inventories in Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth  of Independent States, initiated in June 2003. She said the main  objective of the three-year project was to improve documentation  and transparency in GHG inventories. Activities undertaken so far  had included: the identification of key emissions sources in the  region; the development of a regional website, a database of  regional experts, and a regional discussion forum; the  organization of several workshops; and preparation and  dissemination of training material. The main benefits of the  project include the availability of comparable data from countries  in the region, reduced costs for preparing GHG inventories,  exchange of information, and replicability. Mareckova noted that a  key aim was to encourage the development of national 'manuals of  procedures' on creating GHG inventories.

In the discussion that followed, Ghana commented that some  countries had such manuals of procedures, based on the IPCC good  practice guidelines, and find them helpful.

Ravi Sharma, UNEP, presented an overview of a project to Assess  the Impacts of, and Adaptation to, Climate Change (AIACC). He  explained that the project covers multiple regions and sectors,  involving 24 regional studies and 46 developing countries. It is  funded by the GEF, with UNEP acting as the implementing agency. He  indicated that the project aims to build scientific and technical  capacity and support the development of national communications.  It promotes regional V&A assessments and is also a capacity- building exercise involving stakeholders and national  communications teams. Responding to a question from Senegal about  project follow-up and future financing, Sharma reported that these  matters were still under discussion. On a question from Thailand  regarding methodologies, Sharma explained that AIACC does not  promote any particular methodology.

Emilio Sempris, Water Center for the Humid Tropics of Latin  America and the Caribbean (CATHALAC), presented on national,  regional and multi-country projects related to climate change. He  explained that CATHALAC is dedicated to enhancing scientific  understanding of water management, and described the three-year  project for Capacity Building for Stage II Adaptation to Climate  Change in Central America, Mexico and Cuba. He also described the  Mesoamerican Monitoring and Visualization System, as well as  another CATHALAC project to strengthen the capacity of Central  American countries to prevent and manage disasters and to deal  with climate change.

Andrea Volentras, SPREP, outlined SPREP's activities in assisting  Pacific island countries with their national communications.  Outlining lessons learned from the first national communications  process, he noted the need for realistic goals that take into  account the timeframe and available resources. He also stressed  the need to sustain capacity and expertise over the long-term, and  to mainstream climate change within the wider policy arena.  Regarding SPREP's plans to assist the preparation of second  national communications, he highlighted that SPREP's 70 staff  members had significant expertise on climate issue. He explained  that SPREP can assist with the information stocktaking exercise,  and can also support national stakeholder consultations, the  preparation of the funding proposals, and the second  communications exercise itself. He also noted plans to hold  workshops and UNFCCC side events, and a proposal to employ a  national communications adviser, a GHG mitigation officer, and an  adaptation officer.

In the general discussion that followed, several participants  expressed their regrets at the GEF's absence from the workshop.  The UNFCCC Secretariat explained that the GEF's climate team was  in a transitional phase, and had therefore been unable to send a  representative to this workshop. The GEF had sent its apologies  that it was unable to attend. Georgia wondered what incentives had  been provided to the private sector in Uruguay to encourage their  involvement in the national communications process. Santos  responded that private sector participation had been voluntary,  and that their interests lay in the economic opportunities  provided by measures such as improvements in energy efficiency or  a system of carbon credits. In response to a query from Senegal on  the mandate of the UNFCCC to provide guidance to Parties, Thailand  reminded participants that CGE is mandated to provide Parties with  technical support.

# SESSION TEN

### MULTILATERAL AND REGIONAL SUPPORT PROGRAMMES

On Friday morning, 30 April, delegates were briefed on four  support programmes at the multilateral and regional levels. These  included presentations from representatives of the Asian  Development Bank (ADB), WMO, APN, and the Inter-American Institute  for Global Change Research (IAI).

Edy Brotoisworo, ADB, opened the session with a presentation on  the Climate Change Adaptation Programme for the Pacific (CLIMAP).  Noting that earlier ADB activities to support the UNFCCC had dealt  with climate mitigation, he highlighted the increasing focus on  adaptation that had resulted in the development of CLIMAP. He  explained that CLIMAP seeks to mainstream climate adaptation  through risk reduction. It involves a two-stage approach, starting  with a short stocktaking exercise, followed by a longer process  involving pilot activities focused on Micronesia and the Cook  Islands. Responding to a comment from the Philippines about  mainstreaming adaptation within national government plans,  Brotoisworo acknowledged that this was not an easy task, but  confirmed that involving government and other stakeholders was a  critical part of the programme.

Buruhani Nyenzi, WMO, described the WMO's activities related to  climate change, including the World Climate Programme (WCP), GCOS,  the World Climate and Climate Research Programme, and Global  Atmospheric Watch. He informed participants that WCP coordinates  most of WMO's climate change-related divisions, including the  World Climate Data Monitoring Programme, the World Climate  Applications and Climate Information and Prediction Services, and  the Agricultural Meteorology Programme. Nyenzi listed the various  activities carried out under these programmes, which he said  sought to improve: the capacity of WMO members in climate  monitoring; the systemic global monitoring of atmospheric, oceanic  and terrestrial systems; and climate data 'rescue' activities to  preserve data at risk of being lost due to deterioration of the  medium used to store it.

During the discussion that followed, several participants  emphasized the need to involve meteorological departments in  climate change activities. The Philippines noted that national  weather specialists tend to be conservative when it comes to  attributing extreme weather events to global warming, which  sometimes sends a contradictory message.

Samuel Penafiel, APN, briefed participants on APN's mission,  structure and ongoing project activities. He provided details of  APN's four thematic areas: changes in coastal zones and inland  waters; changes in atmospheric composition; climate change and  variability; and changes in terrestrial ecosystems and  biodiversity. He also highlighted APN's CAPaBLE project.

Linda Stevenson, APN, on behalf of Gerhard Breulmann, IAI, spoke  about IAI's climate change programmes and projects. Reflecting on  past activities, she drew attention to work on the Collaborative  Research Networks (CRNs), and explained that a second round of  CRNs was now under development. The total budget for these CRNs is  expected to be in the range of US$8-11 million. Looking ahead, she  highlighted IAI's intention to streamline its proposals process,  including plans to develop a fully web-based project submission  system. She also noted that IAI is considering earmarking funds  for 'young' or 'aspiring' scientists.

# SESSION ELEVEN

### BILATERAL SUPPORT PROGRAMMES

On Friday, delegates were briefed on three bilateral support  programmes funded by Canada, Finland, and the US. The  presentations were followed by a general discussion on the issues  raised.

Satender Singh, Department of Foreign Affairs and International  Trade, Canada, opened the session with a description of the Canada  Climate Change Development Fund, a CA$100 million, five-year  initiative started in July 2000. He explained that the Canadian  International Development Agency administers the fund, with the  broad goal of promoting activities to combat the causes and  effects of climate change while contributing to sustainable  development and poverty reduction. Singh noted that the fund has  four programme areas: emissions reductions, adaptation, carbon  sequestration and core capacity building. He said current  activities include 36 main projects, six small project funds  created to provide a more flexible and responsive mechanism, and  three contributions to multilateral funds.

Mervi Kultamaa, Second Secretary to Finland's Embassy to the  Philippines, reported on a bilateral support programme for small  island developing States in the Caribbean. Noting that countries  in this region are among those suffering the most from climate  change, she highlighted problems with the region's weather  observation systems, which have been deteriorating due to lack of  funding, infrastructure and expertise. Outlining her country's  efforts to help strengthen the meteorological services in the  region, Kultamaa reported that Finland had provided €3.8 million  to upgrade the observation network, improve telecommunications  used for transmitting data, and establish a regional laboratory to  provide much-needed instrument calibration and maintenance. The  funding had also been used to rescue historical data and to  increase the number of national meteorological experts.

Jack Fitzgerald, US EPA, on behalf of Toral Patel-Weynand, US  Department of State, presented a list of US bilateral projects in  non-Annex I Parties. He elaborated on an impacts and adaptation  project in Mexico, which aims to evaluate adaptation to the  potential impacts of climate change on water resources. The  project also aims to identify, analyze and prioritize adaptation  options, and to develop and apply a process for assessing  adaptation needs. Fitzgerald stressed that climate impacts and  adaptation activities should involve local stakeholder processes.  He also drew attention to US engagement in a bilateral initiative  on integrated environmental strategies, which addresses global and  local benefits of climate-related activities involving eight  countries worldwide.

In the general discussion that followed, several participants  expressed their appreciation at the support provided by Finland  and the US for projects to enhance regional capacity in tracking  climate patterns. Peru noted her gratitude at the role played by  bilateral aid in complementing the resources made available from  multilateral sources, which are sometimes difficult to access.  However, she questioned why only LDCs were provided funds to  prepare NAPAs. She said several other developing countries were  experiencing levels of poverty equivalent to that in LDCs, and  faced a dilemma over whether limited available resources should be  spent on development, or on climate change activities. Mauritius  called on the UNFCCC Secretariat to devise a mechanism to channel  bilateral aid in cooperation with other UN agencies, so as to make  it more accessible to small developing countries. Martha Perdomo,  UNFCCC Secretariat, informed participants that the Secretariat has  been mandated to prepare a website listing bilateral sources, and  is in the process of doing so.

# RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE WORKSHOP

On Friday afternoon, Graham Sem, UNFCCC Secretariat, introduced  text outlining the proposed recommendations of the workshop. He  noted that this text was based on issues raised by participants  during the workshop, and on the Rapporteurs' summaries of each  session. Participants discussed the substance and accuracy of  these recommendations, making a number of suggestions to improve  the text. The recommendations were then endorsed by participants,  on the understanding that their comments and suggestions would be  taken into account when finalizing the text. The recommendations  will form part of the report of the workshop, which will be  transmitted to SBI-20.

### RECOMMENDATIONS

The recommendations include sections on five  topics relating to the preparation of non-Annex I national  communications: national GHG inventories, measures to adapt to  climate change; measures to mitigate the effects of climate  change; other information related to national communications; and  financial and technical support.

###     National greenhouse gas inventories

The section on inventories  recommends that the UNFCCC Secretariat should collaborate with  other relevant organizations to develop a central repository of  information, tools and methods for GHG inventories, funding  permitting. These resources would then be disseminated to  non-Annex I Parties. The recommendations include a request that  the Secretariat promote actions such as training and information  sharing to help non-Annex I Parties prepare their GHG inventories.

The recommendations also highlight the importance of reporting on  gaps relating to GHG inventories, as this would help identify  capacity-building needs and relevant financial requirements. In  addition, experts and institutions from non-Annex I Parties are  requested to provide information on their national emission factors  to the IPCC EFDB editorial board, and to use the information in  the EFDB whenever appropriate.

###     Measures to facilitate adequate adaptation

Participants call for:existing software, tools, methods and models for V&A  assessments to be made readily available to non-Annex I Parties by  modeling centers and institutions, and the development of a  central repository by the UNFCCC Secretariat to disseminate these  tools and methods; the level of financial and technical resources for V&A  assessments to be commensurate with the specific needs and  concerns identified by non-Annex I Parties; the expansion and further elaboration by the UNFCCC  Secretariat of the section in the UNFCCC Guidelines on measures to  facilitate adequate adaptation, in collaboration with other  relevant organizations; consideration to be given to issues relating to Intellectual  Property Rights in the development and use of models and tools in  V&A assessments, particularly at the local community levels and  those that include the use of traditional knowledge; action by the GEF implementing agencies to address and  streamline delays in the project approval process for the  preparation of LDC NAPAs and the preparation of second national  communications; and further clarification on the expected outputs/products of the  APF, by the agency responsible for its development, including  regarding its potential for synergy with other initiatives and  practices, its utility in addressing other impacts identified in  the IPCC Third Assessment Report, and its potential for  integrating traditional knowledge and practices.

The recommendations also note that the APF could contribute to  measuring how the adverse effects of climate change will affect  sustainable development, and consequently the UN Millennium  Development Goals and poverty reduction strategies at national and  regional levels. They call on UNDP and other collaborating  organizations to explore the possibilities of replicating the APF  in other regions.

###     Measures to mitigate climate change

Participants recommend that  the UNFCCC Secretariat and bilateral and multilateral support  programmes should make training available to non-Annex I Parties  on the use of models and tools for mitigation analyses, and on the  development of mitigation scenarios. They also recommend that  background information on incorporating private sector mitigation  programmes or projects should be provided in national  communications.

###     Other information related to national communications

Participants  recommend that the Secretariat develop and disseminate a template  to facilitate the reporting on research and systematic  observation, capacity building, technology transfer and education,  training and public awareness, information and networking. This  template would be included in the user manual prepared by the  Secretariat on non-Annex I national communications.

###     Financial and technical support

On financial and technical  support, participants recommend that:the GEF should be asked to clarify to non-Annex I Parties  that two options - expedited procedures or full-size GEF proposals  - are available to fund the preparation of national  communications, and that Parties have the freedom to choose the  option that suits them best; a decision on what option Parties will select for funding  their national communications should be taken after the  stocktaking exercise is completed; and, the NCSP should develop and, where necessary, strengthen its  partnerships with regional climate centers and centers of  excellence in delivering technical support to non-Annex I Parties.

# CLOSING REMARKS

Following agreement on the recommendations of the workshop late on  Friday afternoon, Luis Gómez-Echeverri, UNFCCC Secretariat, made  his closing remarks, thanking the Government of the Philippines,  UNDP Philippines, the US, Spain and Switzerland, and APN, as well  as the GEF and other multilateral and bilateral institutions. He  also expressed his gratitude to the participants, support staff,  and the meeting Chairs and Rapporteurs for their hard work. Noting  that the workshop marked the launch of the second round of  national communications, he praised the number of Parties,  estimated at between 50 and 75, that will embark on their second  national communications in 2004. However, he underscored that  significant challenges still remain in ensuring greater capacity,  training and general support to prepare national communications,  and for climate change-related activities at the national level.  He highlighted the importance of the work of the CGE in this  regard.

The workshop closed at 6:20 pm.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR BEFORE SB-20

### SECOND WORLD CONFERENCE ON BIOMASS FOR ENERGY, INDUSTRY, AND  CLIMATE PROTECTION

This conference will convene from 10-14 May  2004, in Rome, Italy, to discuss the use of biomass as a source of  renewable energy and carbon dioxide reduction. For more  information, contact: ETA Renewable Energies, Italy; tel: +39-55- 500-2174; fax: +39-55-573-425; e-mail:  biomass.conf@etaflorence.it; Internet:  http://www.conference-biomass.com/conference_Welcome.htm.

### SECOND WORLD RENEWABLE ENERGY FORUM

This Forum will take place  from 29-31 May 2004, in Bonn, Germany. It will consider the use of  renewable energy in industry, rural areas, and cities, and  renewable energy projects proposed by NGOs prior to the Renewables  2004 conference, to be held immediately after the Forum (see  below). For more information, contact: World Council for Renewable  Energy/EUROSOLAR; tel: +49-228-362-373; fax: +49-228-361-213;  e-mail: info@wcre.org; Internet:  http://www.world-council-for-renewable-energy.org.

### INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE FOR RENEWABLE ENERGIES (RENEWABLES 2004)

This conference will convene from 1-4 June 2004, in Bonn, Germany.  For more information, contact: Secretariat of the International  Conference for Renewable Energies; tel: +49-6196-794404; fax: +49- 6196-794405; e-mail: info@renewables2004.de; Internet:  http://www.renewables2004.de.

### TWENTIETH SESSIONS OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES TO THE UNFCCC

SB-20  will be held from 16-25 June 2004, in Bonn, Germany. For more  information, contact: UNFCCC Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815-1000;  fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.int; Internet:  http://www.unfccc.int.