---
title: "REPORT OF THE THIRD CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE UNITED NATIONS FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE: 1 – 11 DECEMBER 1997"
id: enb1276e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1276e
date: 1997-12-11
abstract: "The Third Conference of the Parties (COP-3) to the United  Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC) was  held from 1 - 11 December 1997 in Kyoto, Japan. Over 10,000  participants, including representatives from governments,  intergovernmental organizations, NGOs and the press,  attended the Conference, which included a high-level  segment featuring statements from over 125 ministers.  Following a week and a half of intense formal and informal  negotiations, including a session on the final evening that  lasted into the following day, Parties to the FCCC adopted  the Kyoto Protocol on 11 December."
---

In the Kyoto Protocol, Parties in Annex I of the FCCC  agreed to commitments with a view to reducing their overall  emissions of six greenhouse gases (GHGs) by at least 5%  below 1990 levels between 2008 and 2012. The protocol also  establishes emissions trading, joint implementation between  developed countries, and a 'clean development mechanism' to  encourage joint emissions reduction projects between  developed and developing countries.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

The first meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the  FCCC (COP-1) took place in Berlin from 28 March - 7 April  1995. In addition to addressing a number of important  issues related to the future of the Convention, delegates  reached agreement on what many believed to be the central  issue before COP-1 - adequacy of commitments, the so-called  Berlin Mandate. The result was to establish an open-ended  Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate (AGBM) to begin a  process toward appropriate action for the period beyond  2000, including the strengthening of the commitments of  Annex I Parties through the adoption of a protocol or  another legal instrument.

### AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE (AGBM)

At AGBM-1, held  in Geneva from 21-25 August 1995, delegates considered  several issues, including an analysis and assessment to  identify possible policies and measures for Annex I Parties  and requests for inputs to subsequent sessions. They  debated the nature, content and duration of the analysis  and assessment and its relationship to other aspects of the  process. Several developed and developing countries  stressed that analysis and assessment should be conducted  in parallel and not prior to negotiations of a legal  instrument, but a few developing countries insisted that  more time was needed, particularly to evaluate economic  costs.

At AGBM-2, held in Geneva from 30 October - 3 November  1995, debate over the extent of analysis and assessment  continued, but delegates also heard new ideas for the  structure and form of a possible protocol. Delegates  considered: strengthening of commitments in Article 4.2(a)  and (b) regarding policies and measures, as well as  establishing quantified emission limitation and reduction  objectives (QELROs) within specified time frames, advancing  the implementation of Article 4.1, and possible features of  a protocol or another legal instrument.

At AGBM-3, held in Geneva from 5-8 March 1996, delegates  heard a number of specific proposals on new commitments for  Annex I Parties, including a two-phase CO2 emissions  reduction target proposed by Germany. They also discussed  how Annex I countries might distribute or share new  commitments, and whether those should take the form of an  amendment or protocol. Delegates agreed to compile  proposals for new commitments for consideration at AGBM-4,  and to hold informal roundtable discussions on policies and  measures as well as on QELROs.

AGBM-4, held from 8-19 July 1996 during the Second  Conference of the Parties (COP-2) in Geneva, completed its  in-depth analyses of the likely elements of a protocol or  another legal instrument, and appeared ready to move  forward to the preparation of a negotiating text. Most of  the discussions dealt with approaches to policies and  measures, QELROs, and an assessment of the likely impact of  new commitments for Annex I Parties on developing  countries. Upon the conclusion of COP-2, delegates noted  the 'Geneva Declaration,' which endorsed the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)  conclusions and called for legally binding objectives and  significant reductions in GHG emissions. COP-2 also saw a  significant shift in position by the US, which for the  first time supported a legally binding agreement to fulfill  the Berlin Mandate. However, even as Parties prepared to  strengthen commitments, COP-2 highlighted the sharpest  differences between them.

AGBM-5, which met in Geneva from 9-18 December 1996,  considered proposals from 14 Parties or groups of Parties  regarding strengthening of commitments, advancing the  implementation of Article 4.1, and possible elements of a  protocol or another legal instrument. Delegates adopted  conclusions that requested the Secretariat to produce a  'framework compilation' of proposals for further  consideration.

AGBM-6 met from 3-7 March 1997 in Bonn. Delegates met in  'non-groups' to exchange views and 'streamlined' the  framework compilation text by merging or eliminating some  overlapping provisions within the myriad of proposals. This  brought the process one step, albeit a small one, closer to  fulfilling its mandate. Much of the discussion centered on  a proposal from the EU for a 15% cut in a 'basket' of  greenhouse gases by the year 2010 compared to 1990 levels.   Other proposals emerged in the eleventh hour, signaling  that AGBM-6, despite the hopes of many observers, had yet  to foster much progress on several fundamental points.

AGBM-7 met from 28 July - 7 August 1997 in Bonn. A total of  145 Parties and Observer States participated in the  session, as well as 691 representatives from NGOs and the  media. AGBM-7 further streamlined the negotiating text. In  the absence of initial formal proposals for emissions  reduction targets by the US and Japan, there was a  widespread sense that most of the progress achieved at this  session was limited to a reduction in the number of  proposals.

The final session of the AGBM was held from 22 - 31 October  1997 in Bonn. As AGBM-8 began, US President Bill Clinton  included a call for 'meaningful participation' by  developing countries in the negotiating position he  announced in Washington. With those words, the debates that  shaped agreement back in 1995 resurfaced, with an  insistence on G-77/China involvement once again linked to  the level of ambition acceptable by the US. In response,  the G-77/China used every opportunity to distance itself  from any attempts to draw developing countries into  agreeing to anything that could be interpreted as new  commitments. Some observers thought the Japanese proposal,  combining an overall reduction target of 5% with scope for  differentiation, would likely provide the outline of the  eventual compromise. AGBM-8 was suspended until the day  before the COP-3 opening in Kyoto to allow time to continue  informal consultations on outstanding items, such as the  number of GHGs to include, budget period or single-year  targets, and sinks.

# REPORT OF THE MEETING

After a one-day resumed session of the AGBM on 30 November  1997, COP-3 officially opened on 1 December at the Kyoto  International Conference Hall in Kyoto, Japan. During the  course of the ten-day meeting that featured round-the-clock  negotiating sessions, delegates met both in plenary and in  a a sessional Committee of the Whole (COW) to consider  Agenda Item 5, the adoption of a protocol or another legal  instrument, as well as issues related to methodologies to  estimate emission sources and sinks. On 8-9 December, the  COP held a high-level segment attended by ministers and  heads of delegation. Statements were made by over 125  ministers while the COW continued informal deliberations.  The final marathon session of the COW began at 1:00 am on  Thursday, 11 December, when delegates began an article-by- article review of the text, discussing the provisions  related to QELROs, emissions trading and voluntary non- Annex I commitments at length. The final COP-3 Plenary  convened at approximately 1:00 pm to adopt the Kyoto  Protocol (FCCC/1997/L.7/Add.1).

The following report describes the discussions held in the  resumed AGBM-8, the COP-3 Plenary, the High-Level Segment  and the COW, and includes an article-by-article description  of the Kyoto Protocol.

# RESUMED AGBM-8

The resumed eighth session of the Ad Hoc Group on the  Berlin Mandate (AGBM-8) met informally on 30 November 1997  to discuss the treatment of GHG sinks, and then in Plenary  to conclude discussions on the AGBM report to COP-3.  Delegates agreed that informal consultations on sinks would  continue through COP-3.

The Secretariat reviewed the documents under consideration:*the report of AGBM-8 (FCCC/AGBM/1997/8); *the revised text under negotiation (FCCC/CP/1997/2 and  Add.1); *a technical review of the revised text under negotiation  (FCCC/CP/1997/ CRP.1); *a note on measures by non-Annex I Parties to reduce the  growth of their emissions (FCCC/AGBM/1997/CRP.5); *a note on information submitted by Parties on possible  criteria for differentiation (FCCC/AGBM/1997/Misc.3 and  Add.1 and 2); *responses to a questionnaire on sinks  (FCCC/AGBM/1997/Misc.4 and Add.1 and Add.2); and *a synthesis of information from Annex I national  communications on sources and sinks in the land-use change  and forestry sector (FCCC/TP/1997/5).

The RUSSIAN FEDERATION presented a proposal on Article 3  (QELROs). The proposal stated that Parties included in  Annex I shall ensure that their collective net aggregate  anthropogenic carbon dioxide equivalent emissions of the  GHGs listed in Annex A, expressed in terms of an emissions  budget, as tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents, inscribed  in Attachment I, do not exceed [__] tonnes. The text also  stated that each Party included in Annex I shall ensure  that its net aggregate anthropogenic carbon dioxide  emissions of the GHGs listed in Annex A do not exceed its  commitments, expressed in terms of emissions budgets,  inscribed in Attachment I. The text proposed that  commitments for each Party included in Annex I shall be  established using the process set out in Annex B and shall  be inscribed in Attachment I.

AGBM Chair Raúl Estrada Oyuela (Argentina) noted that there  were many unresolved issues regarding QELROs and delegates  must decide at some point the number of gases to be  included in the protocol. He proposed that delegates work  from the presumption that the protocol would cover six  gases: carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O), methane  (CH4), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs)  and sulphur hexafluoride (SF6).

The UK asked that the distinction between the three-gas and  six-gas approaches be maintained. HUNGARY, the RUSSIAN  FEDERATION, POLAND and the G-77/CHINA supported using a  three-gas basket, addressing the three additional gases  later. The US indicated that it had consistently advocated  a comprehensive approach regarding the inclusion of a broad  spectrum of GHGs within the scope of the and supported the  proposal by the Chair to work on the basis of six GHGs.   NORWAY said that methodologies were available to work on  the basis of six GHGs and, with SWITZERLAND, supported the  Chair's proposal. BRAZIL noted that long-lived gases  required the attention of the AGBM and hoped that consensus  could be reached.

The Chair of the informal group on sinks, Antonio La Viña,  (Philippines) reported that the group had worked on a  proposal containing the following four options:1. QELROs should be calculated on a 'net-net' basis, i.e.,  all sources minus all sinks in both the base year and the  target year for the first budget period.

2. There should be a sink category called 'land use change  and forestry' (LUCF), not to be considered for the  establishment of QELROs in the first budget period, but for  which the IPCC should improve methodologies geared to their  inclusion during the second budget period.

3. The LUCF should be excluded for the establishment of  QELROs, with the proviso that they be included at a later  stage by the COP serving as the Meeting of the Parties to  the Protocol on the basis of new modalities and revised  IPCC methods.

4. The establishment of QELROs excluded the LUCF category,  but allowed GHG removal by 'new activities' to be counted  towards compliance if 'verifiable.' The 'new activities'  would be defined on the basis of advice from the IPCC and  agreed upon by the COP.

La Viña noted that while Parties acknowledged the  importance of sinks, there were scientific uncertainties  regarding sinks' GHG absorption capacity and methodologies  used to calculate this. He noted that options 3 and 4 might  serve as the bases for a compromise, considering the marked  divergence of views on options 1 and 2.

CHINA drew attention to the fact that budget periods  appeared under each option, and recalled the G-77/China's  objection to this concept. BRAZIL and ICELAND indicated  that the issue of sinks needed to be sorted out before  settling targets for QELROs. BRAZIL noted the value of the  third option as a basis for compromise. It was agreed that  consultations on the matter would continue during COP-3.

Introducing a discussion on budgets, Estrada noted that the  G-77/China favored target years and there was a general  trend towards acceptance of the possibility of budgets. The  G-77/CHINA said the assumption of a consensus on budgeting  could be premature. The budget concept does not appear in  the Berlin Mandate. CHINA said the budget concept had been  introduced along with a string of extraneous issues. A text  submitted by the G-77/CHINA, setting out six reasons for  rejecting the budget concept, had been suppressed and did  not appear in the Chair's revised negotiating text. Estrada  said his revised paper included only those items that had  actually been discussed at AGBM-8. He said the possibility  of using budgets is open.

He called for compromise on policies and measures (P&Ms),  noting that some delegations are seeking a mandatory  approach while others want none. The EU said it had made  considerable concessions in Bonn by simplifying proposals  for mandatory P&Ms. EGYPT invited the Chair to present a  balanced proposal. The RUSSIAN FEDERATION proposed national  measures. He said the question of P&Ms is linked to other  issues including the basket of gases to be adopted and the  level of flexibility to be accorded to countries with  economies in transition. The EU tabled a new proposal,  stating that any signatory or Party not included in Annex I  nor acting under Article 10 may notify the depository that  it has opted to adopt and implement some or all of the  policies and measures and/or to participate in the  coordination process referred to elsewhere in the protocol.  The G-77/CHINA objected to the inclusion of a reference to  non-Annex I Parties.

Upon adjourning, the Chair said that the rapporteur should  summarize the day's session for COP-3, noting that he had  planned to add conclusions to the AGBM report but no  conclusions had been reached.

# PLENARY DELIBERATIONS

On 1 December, COP-2 President Chen Chimutengwende  (Zimbabwe) opened COP-3 and stated that delegates faced a  political dilemma of apportioning responsibility for the  historical burden that humanity has placed on itself. He  called for acknowledgement of developing country efforts  already underway and said it would not be possible for  these countries to take on new commitments under the new  instrument. He said delegates must agree on: a fair system  of apportionment of emission limits; a globally agreed  reduction pathway; and a projected sustainable and  equitable future emission level. He called for reliable and  predictable financial provisions to facilitate the  acquisition of clean technologies in developing countries.

Hiroshi Ohki (Japan) was then elected President of COP-3.  He said COP-3's most important task was to establish a more  concrete international framework for protecting the global  climate. He stressed the need to discuss steps to be taken  after Kyoto to implement the protocol and said not all  climate change problems could be solved in Kyoto.

Delegates were also welcomed by: Keizo Obuchi, Minister of  Foreign Affairs of Japan; Teiichi Aramaki, Governor of the  Prefecture of Kyoto; and Yorikane Masumoto, Mayor of Kyoto.

FCCC Executive Secretary Michael Zammit Cutajar noted that,  at an estimated 10,000 attendants, COP-3 surpassed all  records for participation in a meeting on climate change.  He stressed that the focus of the Conference should be its  end product. He noted that in a recent exchange of views  with a group of business people, one of them had suggested  that there should be 'no fudge' in the Kyoto agreement.

The goals and the rules for the agreement should be clearly  defined. He contrasted this approach with the propaganda  from certain industrial sectors that 'unashamedly plays  games with the science and statistics of climate change.'  He said that 'in the present constellation of economic and  political power, it is those who have already built their  strength - often through unsustainable economic growth -  who must lead the way towards a sustainable future,' and  called for a clear, binding and verifiable commitment by  industrialized countries to reduce their emissions below  1990 levels early in the next century.

TANZANIA, on behalf of the G-77/CHINA, noted that  developing countries are the most vulnerable to climate  change and the least able to adapt.  He also said that they  are committed to modify trends in human-induced emissions  through the principle of common but differentiated  responsibilities. The delay between production of emissions  and their effects requires Annex I countries to take the  first steps. Developed countries should be blamed if Kyoto  fails. He objected to the proposed 'post-Kyoto evolutionary  process' and to threats to aid unless developing countries  accept it.

LUXEMBOURG, on behalf of the EU, reiterated its position  favoring: a 15% cut in emissions by developed countries,  jointly or individually, by 2010; specific P&Ms; and  consideration of new commitments for developing countries  under FCCC Article 7.1(a) in the future. The RUSSIAN  FEDERATION reiterated its proposal that each Annex I  country consolidate its emissions into aggregate 'carbon  dioxide equivalents' with the obligations of each Annex I  country set out in an attachment and determined according  to an annex.

The US favored a target based on all GHGs, sources and  sinks, flexibility, and meaningful participation of key  developing countries. She offered flexibility on limited,  carefully bounded differentiation and proposed a working  group to examine differentiation, including the Russian  proposal. She noted concerns regarding the EU proposal for  restrictions on emissions trading, the EU's target in light  of its economic advantage under their bubble proposal, the  breadth of differentiation implied, and EU Member State  accountability. She favored different targets for  developing countries, such as emissions growth targets.  Developing countries that assume voluntary commitments  under the proposed Article 10 could gain new resources and  technology through emissions trading.

The President noted that the ratification status report  (FCCC/CP/1997/INF.2), indicating that 167 States and the EU  had become Parties, showed nearly universal recognition of  the importance of climate change issues. On adoption of  rules of procedure (FCCC/CP/1997/5), he noted a draft  decision suggesting that the COP adopt all rules except  rule 22, paragraph 1, on election of the Bureau, and rule  42, paragraph 1, on voting in the absence of consensus,  applying those rules until agreement is reached.

VENEZUELA, SAUDI ARABIA and KUWAIT objected to adopting  incomplete rules. ARGENTINA and the Alliance of Small  Island States (AOSIS) supported the draft decision. The EU  supported the draft decision but suggested that rule 22 was  already agreed. The President called for consultations and  said the COP would continue to apply the draft rules except  rule 42.

The provisional agenda (FCCC/CP/1997/1), annotations on the  organization of work (FCCC/CP/1997/1/Add.1), the list of  documents (FCCC/CP/1997/1/Add.2), and a document on the  High-Level Segment (FCCC/CP/1997/L.1) were adopted. On  election of officers other than the President, delegates  elected Bakary Kante (Senegal) Chair of the Subsidiary Body  for Implementation (SBI), George Manful (Ghana), T.  Gzirishvili (Georgia), Anthony Clarke (Canada), Cornelia  Quennet-Thielen (Germany), Sergio Selaya Bonilla  (Honduras), Luis Herrera (Venezuela), Kok Kee Chow  (Malaysia) and Espen Ronneberg (Marshall Islands), Vice  Presidents, and Maciej Sadowski (Poland) Rapporteur.

On Agenda Item 2, organizational matters, a Committee of  the Whole (COW) was established to take decisions on the  Berlin Mandate, with Raúl Estrada Oyuela elected as Chair.

Reports of the Subsidiary Bodies Delegates next considered reports from the FCCC subsidiary  bodies. Tibor Faragó (Hungary) introduced the report and  draft decisions of the Subsidiary Body on Scientific and  Technological Advice (SBSTA) (FCCC/SBSTA/1997/14).  Delegates noted the report of SBSTA and adopted its draft  decisions on cooperation with the Intergovernmental Panel  on Climate Change (IPCC) and the development of  observational networks. Joint SBSTA/SBI draft decisions  were adopted on the development and transfer of technology  and activities implemented jointly (AIJ).

Mohamed Ould El Ghaouth (Mauritania) introduced the SBI  report (FCCC/SBI/1997/21), which was noted by the COP.  Delegates adopted a joint SBI/SBSTA draft decision on the  division of labor between SBI and SBSTA. Other adopted  decisions addressed: the volume of documentation; Annex I  Party communications; review of the financial mechanism;  the Annex to the Memorandum of Understanding with the GEF;  the financial performance of the Convention in the biennium  1996-1997; and arrangements for administrative support to  the Convention Secretariat.

Patrick Széll (UK) introduced the report of the Ad Hoc  Group on Article 13 (AG13), which considered the  establishment of a multilateral consultative process (MCP).  He noted that the group reached two conclusions: the MCP  should be advisory rather than supervisory in nature and  AG13 should not complete its work until after COP-3. He  said there were still questions remaining: whether Article  13 requires a 'process' or 'committee;' who may trigger the  regime; and whether the MCP should provide assistance to  developing countries or 'consultative' advice to all  countries. COP-3 noted the report of AG13 and adopted a  draft decision that enabled the AG13 to continue its work.

AGBM Chair Raúl Estrada Oyuela reported to COP-3 on the  work of the AGBM. He indicated that the results of the work  of the AGBM on a protocol or another legal instrument were  contained in the revised text under negotiation  (FCCC/CP/1997/2). An addendum to this document contained a  draft proposal to amend the Convention. The Chair drew  attention to a number of issues that were not fully  addressed in the AGBM, such as: methodologies to estimate  emissions by sources and removals by sinks; the treatment  of sinks under the new instrument; a proposal made by  Brazil; and the issue of future development of commitments  for all Parties, referred to by some as 'evolution.' He indicated that the draft negotiating text contained  numerous brackets and alternatives. He urged delegations to  produce an agreement that Parties could comply with. He  said the efforts of key developing country Parties to  mitigate climate change are frequently overlooked and  called attention to reasons given by different developed  countries to refuse or delay the strengthening of their  commitments. While there are indications that some  countries are not willing to fulfill FCCC objectives, the  vast majority of Parties are willing to adopt a set of  legally binding rules to strengthen commitments.

Report of the Global Environment Facility On 3 December, GEF Chair Mohamed El-Ashry introduced the  GEF report (FCCC/CP/1997/30), which updates previous  information on efforts to implement the guidance provided  by previous COP meetings and includes a complete listing of  GEF-financed climate change projects. He recalled that some  Parties had said the GEF procedures were not 'user- friendly,' and noted the adoption of further streamlined  procedures for the preparation of projects for enabling  activities. GEF has provided support to 85 climate change  projects addressing the needs of 114 countries at a cost of  US$63 million. He highlighted Annex A of the report,  describing problems encountered in applying the concept of  agreed full incremental costs. He also noted consensus  among donors on a replenishment target of US$2.75 billion.

The EU expressed disappointment that delegates had not  agreed to establish GEF as the permanent financial  mechanism this year. He commended the agreed level of  financial support for climate change activities. CHINA  noted that efforts to advance existing commitments are  handicapped by a lack of resources and called for a  substantial increase in the GEF replenishment. He called  for an expeditious approval process for funding and noted  that developing countries face enormous difficulties in  undertaking GHG inventories.

URUGUAY indicated that it had been able to submit its first  national communication on GHG sources and sinks because of  GEF financing. The CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC said that the  report should be more detailed and include difficulties  encountered by Parties in obtaining GEF resources to  prepare national communications.

SWITZERLAND, supported by the US, said that GEF should be  established as the permanent FCCC financial mechanism. The  G-77/CHINA referred to the provision of financial resources  and the transfer of technology as fundamental to  implementation of the Convention by non-Annex I Parties. He  pointed out that both were developed countries' obligations  under the Convention and should not be used to push  developing countries to accept new commitments or to accept  a market-based approach under the protocol. The PHILIPPINES  mentioned problems experienced with implementing agencies  and said that they should be more aware of decisions taken  by the GEF Council. INDIA, BHUTAN, BANGLADESH and KIRIBATI  highlighted the importance of obtaining GEF financing for  national communications. The US said GEF had made an effort  to meet the needs of FCCC Parties and expressed  disappointment that the review of the financial mechanism  had not concluded. He also pointed to the need for finding  innovative sources of financing involving the private  sector. The GEF's report was noted.

Technology Transfer On 3 December, the COP President introduced a discussion on  the development and transfer of technologies. CHINA,  supported by INDIA and IRAN, observed two tendencies:  developed countries are only interested in transfer of  technical information, while developing countries deem  technology transfer on non-commercial and preferential  terms most important; and some countries emphasize market  mechanisms. She called for action from developed countries  consistent with Agenda 21, the FCCC and previous COP  resolutions, and recommended that that the issue be taken  up as a separate item at COP-4. SOUTH AFRICA said access to  technology and transfer of technical know-how would play a  crucial role in meeting the energy implications of moving  towards sustainable development. JAPAN outlined the Kyoto  Initiative to strengthen assistance for developing  countries in their efforts to combat global warming, to be  operated through the national Official Development  Assistance programme. The programme will offer concessional  loans to promote training, cooperation on energy-saving  technology, new and renewable energy sources, forest  conservation and afforestation, and will establish  information networks and workshops. INDIA, supported by  IRAN, called for the operationalization of FCCC provisions  relating to state-of-the-art environmentally sound  technologies (EST), in the new legal instrument.

AUSTRALIA said the bulk of ESTs are privately developed and  owned. Governments can create enabling conditions for  technology development and recipient countries must have  appropriate policies for successful transfers. The REPUBLIC  OF KOREA said his country was in consultation with UNEP,  UNDP and the Commission on Sustainable Development with a  view to scheduling an expert group meeting on technology  transfer in Seoul in February 1998. ZIMBABWE outlined her  country's difficulties with basic economic development and  the financial impact of El Niño. She said technology  transfer had become a critical issue.

IRAN identified obstacles facing developing countries  seeking transfers of technology at their own expense due to  restrictions imposed by developed countries. He said  shifting responsibility for transfers to the private sector  contradicts the spirit of Agenda 21.

Second review OF THE ADEQUACY OF ARTICLE 4.2(a) AND (b) The first review of the adequacy of Article 4.2(a) and (b)  was undertaken at COP-1. After judging these commitments  inadequate, COP-1 undertook the Berlin Mandate process.  Article 4.2(d) calls for a second review before 1999. SBI-6  requested the Secretariat to make preparations for COP-3 to  include the review in the agenda for COP-4.

On 3 December, AOSIS, CHINA and ZIMBABWE stated that  deliberation of this item was premature given that it was  unclear what the actions taken under the Berlin Mandate  process would accomplish. AOSIS predicted that the visible  effects of climate change will have to become devastating  before the Annex I countries pushing mediocre proposals  take real action.

CHINA said the lack of national communications also makes  it premature to review adequacy of commitments. The US  pointed out that the review must take account of the Kyoto  outcome and asked that the nature of the review be  clarified. CHINA disagreed, saying that the review is  independent of the outcome in Kyoto, and noted the Article  4.2(d) deadline of December 1998. Delegates decided that  necessary preparations should be made to place the review  of Articles 4.2(a) and (b) on the COP-4 agenda.

Review Of Information On 3 December, delegates discussed the review of  information and possible decisions under Article  4.2(f)(FCCC/CP/1997/L.3). They agreed to the proposal that  the Czech Republic and Slovakia replace Czechoslovakia in  Annex I and that Croatia be added. Delegates debated at  length a proposal by Azerbaijan and Pakistan to delete  Turkey from Annex I and Annex II. IRAN, TURKEY and KUWAIT  supported the proposal. The EU and AUSTRALIA maintained  that Turkey should indicate willingness to undertake  Protocol obligations under Article 10 before its deletion  from the Annexes. The US suggested continuing consideration  of this proposal and other OECD members' relationship to  Annex I at COP-4. TURKEY noted that questions remain  unanswered on the Protocol's proposed Article 10 and  requested that ministers discuss the matter on 10 December.  The Chair proposed that Luis Herrera (Venezuela) conduct  consultations on these amendments. The issue was not  resolved and will be discussed at COP-4.

Proposed Amendments to the FCCC On 3 December, delegates considered proposed amendments to  the Convention and its Annexes (FCCC/SBI/1997/15). The EU  presented a proposal to amend Article 17 to state that  Parties shall make every effort to agree on any proposed  protocol by consensus and, if no agreement is reached, the  protocol shall be adopted by a 3/4 majority. This amendment  would be applied provisionally, pending its entry into  force in accordance with Article 15. The EU said objections  to the protocol might remain at the end of COP-3 and a  decision-making procedure would be needed. The RUSSIAN  FEDERATION emphasized that voting was not the way to adopt  an important international instrument. VENEZUELA said the  amendment and its provisional application must be  considered separately.

Under Kuwait's proposed amendment, Parties would provide  financial resources, including the transfer of technology,  to the extent that the COP decides they are needed by the  developing country Parties. KUWAIT said the developing  countries can only lower emissions through technology, but  resources made available to date have been inadequate. The  EU, supported by the US and JAPAN, said donors should not  place their resources in the hands of the COP. SAUDI ARABIA  said the amendment came in reaction to the EU proposal,  which upsets the Convention's 'delicate balance.' Sergio  Selaya Bonilla (Honduras) conducted consultations on the  EU's proposal and Bakary Kante (Senegal) on Kuwait's  proposal throughout the week. The EU proposal was later  withdrawn. The Kuwait proposal was not accepted.

Following a proposal by CROATIA, delegates discussed the  status of Yugoslavia in relation to the Convention. The  Executive Secretary reported on the results of his request  for information on Yugoslavia's status within the UN and  the FCCC. The President asked Yugoslavia to refrain from  participation in the meeting.

Other Actions The COP took several other actions during the week.   Several documents were noted: activities related to  technical and financial support (FCCC/CP/1997/INF.3); a  report on the second meeting of AGBM-8  (FCCC/AGBM/1997/8/Add.1); and administrative and financial  matters (FCCC/CP/1997/INF.1), including the 1998-99  biennial programme budget.

Parties agreed that Brazil's proposal to relate Parties'  emissions targets to their contributions to climate change  (FCCC/AGBM/1997/MISC.1/Add.3) be given to SBSTA to review  scientific and methodological aspects, and to advise COP-4  on future activities. BRAZIL noted the proposal's political  element: that future objectives be established in terms of  global mean surface temperature change, as a mechanism for  apportioning the burden.

On 5 December, delegates accepted an offer by ARGENTINA to  host COP-4 and subsidiary body meetings, from 2-13 November  1998, in Buenos Aires.

# HIGH-LEVEL SEGMENT

The High-Level Segment for Ministers and Other Heads of  Delegation was held during morning, afternoon and evening  sessions from 8-9 December 1997. Following the opening  addresses, ministers and other heads of delegations engaged  in a general debate.

Ryutaro Hashimoto, Prime Minister of Japan, urged developed  countries to agree on meaningful, realistic and equitable  emissions reduction targets that are legally binding. He  called on all Parties, including developing countries, to  voluntarily enhance their measures. He noted that  regulation could trigger innovation, promote capital  investment and give rise to new industry.

José María Figueres Olsen, President of Costa Rica, said  the Kyoto agreement must include significant cuts in  emissions by industrialized countries, a financial  mechanism bridging developed and developing countries, and  active voluntary participation by the developing nations.  He noted that Costa Rica has developed a marketable  instrument to value emissions reductions. He called on  developing countries to do their part.

Kinza Clodumar, President of Nauru, called the willful  destruction of small island States with foreknowledge an  'unspeakable crime against humanity.' He said solving the  problem requires more than stabilization of GHGs. He noted  US President Clinton's pledge for significant future  reductions and called for an announcement on this from Vice  President Gore.

US Vice President Albert Gore Jr. reiterated the US  commitment to reduce emissions by 30% of projected levels  by 2010 and key elements of the US proposal. He announced  increased US flexibility for working towards a commitment  with realistic targets and time tables, market mechanisms,  and participation of key developing countries.

Maurice Strong, Under-Secretary-General and Executive  Coordinator for UN Reform, delivered a statement for UN  Secretary-General Kofi Annan. He said many would be  disappointed that the Kyoto agreement would be a modest  step.

# GENERAL DEBATE

COP President Hiroshi Ohki (Japan) reported substantial  progress at the intensive discussions in Kyoto and  expressed confidence about a breakthrough for final  agreement.

FCCC Executive Secretary Michael Zammit Cutajar commented  on the remarkable nature of the Conference given the media  interest and the scale of the UN Internet broadcast, which  have focused world attention on Kyoto. He said the Zen  practice of breaking through mental boundaries provided a  good theme for the days ahead when negotiators would have  to break through the tendency to consider the short-term  costs while neglecting the long-term economic  opportunities.

On behalf of the G-77 and China, Bakari Mbonde (Tanzania)  said decisive action would be needed to strengthen  developed country obligations. He underlined the Berlin  Mandate to achieve QELROs and advance implementation of  commitments under Article 4.1 without new commitments for  developing country Parties. Developing countries had  undertaken their own measures and the success of these was  predicated on Annex I country fulfillment of their  commitments including transfer of technology. He rejected  offshore extra-territorial implementation of targets and  welcomed the Clean Development Fund initiative.

Dr. Johny Lahure (Luxembourg), on behalf of the EU,  rejected differentiation that makes targets weaker.  Instead, it must guarantee comparable commitments for major  economies at least. Flexibility resulting in  environmentally detrimental loopholes is unacceptable. He  supported: the 'three plus three' gas proposal; trading  along with strong targets and domestic action, monitoring,  sanctions and market safeguards; and JI with rules and  safeguards. He said mandatory, internationally coordinated  P&Ms are indispensable. Suggestions that developing  countries should take up new commitments are not helpful to  the negotiations and contrary to the Berlin Mandate.  Mobilizing new and additional resources through the  financial mechanism could foster voluntary limitation of  developing country GHG emissions.

Many speakers focused on elements necessary for a Kyoto  agreement. SAMOA, on behalf of AOSIS, and supported by  NIUE, stated that a Kyoto agreement must contain strong,  short- and medium-term targets for Annex I Parties and a  mechanism for early review of their adequacy. NORWAY said  developed countries must agree on an overall reduction  target for the emission of all GHGs of 10 to 15% by 2010. A  flat rate approach fails in fairness and effectiveness, and  renders an ambitious agreement impossible. SOUTH AFRICA  supported the EU-proposed targets.

Developing countries rejected the concept of voluntary  commitments as they linked the output of emissions with  development and progress, which they said was their highest  priority. They stressed that the Berlin Mandate had not  called on developing countries to take responsibility for  what was essentially the result of industrialized  countries' action. They stressed that developed countries  should take the lead and follow the principle of 'common  but differentiated responsibilities.' AOSIS called for the  strongest emissions cuts as they spoke of certain disaster  in the face of political paralysis. Oil-producing countries  called for establishment of a compensation mechanism should  full implementation be carried out.

Developed countries expressed varied approaches. Members of  the EU stressed their group position and detailed their  individual commitments and efforts. Others partially agreed  to this but said that developing countries needed to make  voluntary commitments and at least begin the 'sequencing of  obligations.' A process through which a review of  commitments by all Parties could be carried out was also  raised.

From both developed and developing countries, there was a  call for binding and realistic targets as well as the need  for funds to assist technology transfer and the integration  of sustainable development within developing countries.  However, the ways by which this could be carried out heard  various suggestions from the floor, including joint  implementation (JI) and the clean development fund -- the  latter frequently linked to a compliance mechanism. The  loopholes in these approaches were also addressed, with  developing and developed countries cautioning against or  rejecting JI as a possible means of circumventing reduction  objectives.

Also controversial were the issues of emissions trading,  the use of sinks/sources and banking credits. Those who  questioned the wisdom of such mechanisms recalled the  Convention's goal of emission reductions and voiced the  fear that such measures would exacerbate the gap between  the countries.

# COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE

The first meeting of the COW convened on 1 December. The  COW established three negotiating groups on: institutions  and mechanisms; advancing the implementation of FCCC  Article 4.1 and the financial mechanism; and P&Ms. COW  Chair Raúl Estrada Oyuela conducted negotiations on QELROs.  In addition, a number of informal groups considered other  issues.

Delegates met in a 'stock-taking' COP Plenary on Friday, 5  December. Estrada reported that delegates had met eight  times, but needed more time. Negotiations in the COW  continued over the weekend so that only a few key issues  would remain for the consideration by the ministers during  the High-Level Segment.

The final meeting of the COW began on Wednesday, 10  December, at approximately 7:00 pm. The meeting was  suspended to allow for distribution of the Chair's final  draft (FCCC/CP/1997/CRP.6) and further informal  consultations. At 1:00 am, delegates began an article-by- article review of the text, discussing the provisions  related to QELROs, emissions trading and voluntary non- Annex I commitments at length.

Throughout the night delegates worked to adopt all of the  articles in the text. At times it appeared as though the  negotiations would break down, but, finally at 10:15 am,  the COW completed its work and agreed unanimously to submit  the text of the protocol to the COP Plenary for formal  adoption. The final COP-3 Plenary convened at approximately  1:00 pm on Thursday, 11 December to adopt the Kyoto  Protocol (FCCC/1997/L.7/Add.1).

# KYOTO PROTOCOL TO THE UN FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE  CHANGE

The Kyoto Protocol to the UN Framework Convention on  Climate Change contains a preamble, 28 articles and two  annexes. The following is a summary of the Kyoto Protocol,  highlighting the issues that were resolved during COP-3.

PREAMBLE AND ARTICLE 1 (Definitions): Under the Preamble,  the Parties agree to the provisions in the Protocol. The  Preamble also notes FCCC Articles 2 and 3, and the Berlin  Mandate. Article 1 recalls the definitions of the FCCC for  use by the Protocol.

ARTICLE 2 (Policies and Measures): The negotiating group on  Article 2 discussed a revised draft text prepared by Chair  Mohamed Ould El Ghaouth (Mauritania). There was some  agreement on the kind of policies and measures to be  considered and on their inclusion in the protocol. There  were differences over whether policies and measures should  apply to non-Annex I Parties and whether their application  should be adjusted according to national circumstances. A  related discussion concerned the issue of  'comparability.'  The options for coordination were also discussed.

On 5 December in the COW 'stocking-taking' Plenary, El- Ghaouth reported that the negotiating group on P&Ms had  produced a draft document, although divergence of views  persisted on whether P&Ms should be compulsory or not.

In the final Plenary of the COW, KUWAIT proposed deleting  subparagraphs on reduction and phasing out of market  imperfections and subsidies and on controlling transport  sector emissions. The Chair said there was no consensus for  the deletions and the article was adopted.

Article 2, as adopted, describes policies and measures that  each Annex I Party shall implement or elaborate in  achieving its QELROs, in accordance with national  circumstances. A subparagraph lists measures 'such as:'  energy efficiency; protection and enhancement of sinks;  sustainable agriculture; new and renewable forms of energy,  carbon sequestration and advanced technology; phasing out  of subsidies and incentives that run counter to the FCCC  objective; sectoral reform; GHG emission limitation and  reduction; and methane recovery and use. Parties shall  cooperate to enhance the effectiveness of P&Ms. Annex I  Parties shall pursue limitation of emissions from aviation  and marine bunker fuels, working through the International  Civil Aviation Organization and the International Maritime  Organization. Parties shall strive to minimize the adverse  effects on other Parties, especially developing country  Parties and those identified by FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9.  The COP shall consider ways to elaborate coordination, if  it decides coordination would be beneficial.

ARTICLE 3 (QELROs and Sinks): The article on quantitative  emission limitation and reduction objectives (QELROs) was  discussed in a negotiating group chaired by COW Chair  Estrada throughout the first week, as well as during COW  sessions on 4, 5, 6, 9 and 10 December, the last session  concluding on 11 December.

Discussions of sinks were held in a contact group chaired  by Antonio La Viña (Philippines) during the first week.  Luis Gylvan Meira Filho (Brazil) led informal negotiations  on language to describe commitment periods, originally  termed 'budget periods.' Contact groups were formed to  discuss differentiation and the number of gases to be  covered by the legal instrument.

Canada submitted a proposal on QELROs consisting of a 3%  reduction of GHGs below 1990 levels by the year 2010. It  also provided for an additional reduction of 5% by 2015,  and indicated that the years 2010 and 2015 refer to the  mid-point years of budget periods. It included sinks, six  greenhouse gases and maximum flexibility in its  implementation. Canada said joint implementation with  credit offers the best combination of technology and  financial transfer to developing countries and expressed  the hope that developing countries would see its potential  value.

Commitment Periods: On 2 December, the Article 3  negotiating group focused on emission budgets. Meira Filho  reported to the COW on 5 December on the consultations on  'multi-year targets,' formerly known as 'budgets.' He  stated that problems arose from confusion between the terms  'emission budgets' and 'budget periods.' These were  replaced with 'total emissions' and 'commitment periods,'  respectively. He said there was increasing agreement that  the range for 'commitment periods' should be five years.

On 6 December in the COW Plenary, Meira Filho introduced a  revised draft text. The text added a definition to Article  1, stating that a 'defined amount' means the amount of net  aggregate emissions a Party may not exceed in a given  commitment period to meet its QELROs. The revised text also  contained three alternatives for the first paragraph of  Article 3.

The G-77/CHINA objected to the definition of 'defined  amount' and supported Alternative C, which called for  QELROs within time frames such as 2005, 2010 and 2020.  CHINA objected to the omission of crucial elements of  targets and timetables.

Differentiation: The QELROs negotiating group discussed  possible parameters for differentiation on 2 December, on  the basis of the US offer to be flexible on  differentiation. Delegates discussed approaches to and  concerns over differentiation. The group later considered a  proposal by JAPAN establishing three categories of Annex I  countries.

Further discussion of differentiation occurred in informal  consultations, both in intense bilaterals and under the  guidance of Estrada. By the end of the first week, Estrada  had reportedly produced a set of differentiated target  numbers for Annex I countries.

On 9 December, Estrada introduced a new draft text  (FCCC/CP/1997/CRP.4) at an evening session of the COW. He  indicated that the proposed text on Article 3 would be  treated as a take it or leave it offer. The proposal was  the 'big bubble,' as suggested at various moments during  the negotiations, in particular by Russia. The Chair's text  contained a global reduction of 5% in emissions of CO2,  CH4, NO2 from 1990 levels, for the commitment period  between 2006 and 2010, with the possibility that Parties  fulfill the commitment individually or jointly. He said the  global reduction commitment had been distributed in a  differentiated way, with some countries possibly increasing  emissions, others keeping their current levels, and most  reducing.

At the COW session at 3:20 am on 10 December, Estrada said  intense negotiations and consultations had been conducted  within and between groups since the introduction of the  draft protocol. He said the text needed refinement to  indicate that each Party would be responsible for its  respective number in an annex.

Delegates indicated that a number of major issues were  still in play after the adjournment of the COW. Several  delegations suggested they were not yet ready to accept the  quantified emission limitation and reduction commitment in  the Chair's draft, which put the EU at -8%, the US, Russia,  Canada and Ukraine at -5%, Japan at -4.5%, New Zealand at  0, Australia and Norway at +5% and Iceland at +10%,  compared to 1990 levels.

Coverage: The negotiating group on 3 December discussed a  'three-plus-three' gas coverage proposal, which would  divide six gases into two baskets. The first basket (CO2,  CH4 and N2O) would be subject to QELROs immediately, while  proposals for formulating QELROs for the second basket  (HFCs, PFCs and SF6) would be debated at COP-4. At a 4  December COW meeting, Estrada said that an option listing  gases separately was still open. In the COP Plenary on 5  December, two alternatives regarding coverage were under  consideration: immediate regulation of six gases or the  three-plus-three approach.

The Chair's draft presented in the 9 December COW covered  emissions of CO2, CH4, NO2 from 1990 levels, for the  commitment period between 2006 and 2010. COP-4 was to adopt  an annex to the Protocol establishing reduction commitments  covering HFCs, PFCs, and SF6 with a linkage between the two  baskets.

In the resumed COW meeting early on 10 December, Estrada  noted a possibility to reach agreement covering six gases  from the beginning, rather than the three-plus-three  coverage included earlier that night. Different base years  would be needed for each group of gases: 1990 for CO2, CH4,  NO2; and 1995 in some cases for other gases. He said this  required careful drafting to provide the necessary  transparency.

Sinks: On 2 December, a contact group chaired by Antonio La  Viña discussed a Chair's draft on sinks. The draft would  set QELROs on gross emissions and measure compliance with  net emissions. It referred to 'verifiable changes ...  resulting from direct human induced land-use change and  forestry activities since 1990' to achieve compliance. The  sinks would be limited to a verifiable change in stocks  covered in the land-use change and forestry sector of the  IPCC guidelines.

At the COW session on 4 December, La Viña introduced a  draft document containing three bracketed paragraphs. The  first paragraph stated that Annex I Parties shall ensure  that their [gross] aggregate anthropogenic carbon dioxide  equivalent emissions do not exceed their commitments. The  second bracketed paragraph discussed net [changes in] GHG  emissions from sources and removals by sinks resulting from  direct human-induced land-use change and forestry  activities and listed three options. Option A referred to  variable changes in stocks. Option B referred to verifiable  changes in stocks [up to xx per cent] of the QELROs. Option  C was limited to afforestation, reforestation,  deforestation, and harvesting since 1990 measured as  verifiable changes in stocks used to meet QELROs. A third  paragraph stated that the Meeting of the Parties (MOP)  shall determine how and which human-induced activities  related to GHG emissions and removals in the land-use  change and forestry activities category shall contribute to  meeting QELROs commitments.

AUSTRALIA proposed another option for a fully comprehensive  net approach and suggested that the other options would  introduce inequities between countries, along with  uncertainty. The Australian text stated that the verifiable  net GHG emissions from sources and removals by sinks in  terms of carbon dioxide equivalents resulting from direct  human-induced activities shall be used to meet the QELROs  commitments of each Party in Annex I. It provided for  reporting in a transparent and verifiable manner.

NEW ZEALAND described Option C as very limited and noted  his support for including all verifiable categories. A  number of countries including JAPAN, BARBADOS, BRAZIL and  COSTA RICA supported Option C. The US preferred the  Australian option, but said 'forest management and forest  conservation' should be added to the limited Option C.  ICELAND, URUGUAY, CANADA, MEXICO, COSTA RICA and NEW  ZEALAND supported the US's concern that Option C refers to  only a limited number of activities that can contribute to  sinks. A number of delegations proposed adding language on  forest management. ICELAND called for including restoration  of degraded land. GRENADA suggested giving a negative  credit to countries when sinks are destroyed.

The Chair suggested that Option C appeared ready to attract  consensus, and that it represented a text to limit or set  parameters for sinks. He felt the COW was ready to accept  Option C, with the inclusion of 'forest management and  forest conservation.' However, after further debate, the  Chair noted clear reaction against 'forest management and  forest conservation.' He asked whether the US could support  only 'management.' The US said the choice regarding sinks  would have an enormous impact on a QELROs target number.  The EU said the paragraph should remain bracketed for  ministers. NORWAY said limiting a comprehensive use of  sinks limits a comprehensive policy approach and creates  uncertainties for countries willing to undertake ambitious  commitments.

BRAZIL said the question is: what are man-made activities  for which credits should be given to increase emissions? He  compared the 6 gigatonnes (Gt) of carbon emitted from  fossil fuels and 1 Gt from land-use change to natural  uptake of 2 Gt by oceans and 2 Gt on continental surfaces.  Given deep economic limitations and the inclusion of all  countries, if all forests were considered managed this  would grant a license for 30 percent more emissions.  Because the FCCC includes an obligation to conserve and  maintain sinks and reservoirs, he suggested a separate  article to restate the obligation on all Parties to  sustainably manage their sinks.

At the 5 October COP Plenary, Estrada noted that agreements  on sinks and coverage were necessary before QELROs could be  defined. During the 6 October COW, the RUSSIAN FEDERATION  said the nature of the issue's resolution would determine  his view of the protocol. The US said the text might not be  resolved until calculations regarding targets had been  completed.

Also during the 6 October COW, Contact Group Chair La Viña  introduced a revised non-paper on sinks, containing only  text relating to Option C, accounting for limited sink  activities to offset emissions. JAPAN, BARBADOS, RUSSIA,  the US, CANADA, CUBA and JAMAICA supported the text. NEW  ZEALAND, supported by AUSTRALIA, the US and NORWAY, called  for an earlier text to be kept as an option for ministers.  The US proposed adding 'for the first commitment period' to  a paragraph on when sink activities would be allowed. The  EU put the whole paragraph in brackets.

The text introduced at the 9 December COW meeting included  afforestation, reforestation and deforestation as sinks,  with provision for further analysis.

Other Issues: On 3 December, the negotiating group on  QELROs briefly discussed text on economies in transition.  On 4 December in the COW's 'Stock-Taking' Plenary, Estrada  reported agreement on text on commitments for countries  with economies in transition. A paragraph on emissions  borrowing was eliminated. In the 9 December COW, BURKINA  FASO, supported by BANGLADESH and UGANDA, called for a  reference to an FCCC provision on taking full account of  the situations of the least developed countries.

Final COW Discussion: At 6:30 pm on 10 December, Estrada  informed the COW of the results of informal discussions.  The collective emissions reduction target for Annex I  countries had been increased from 5% to 6%, but these  deeper commitments were conditional on the adoption of  criteria in other areas yet to be finalized, which  included: emissions trading; voluntary commitments; Annex I  country commitments; JI; advancing implementation of  developing country commitments; the financial mechanism;  the Clean Development Mechanism; compliance; entry into  force; and Annex B on the distribution of commitments for  Annex I countries. He predicted that if agreement were  reached, 10 December 1997 might be remembered as the 'day  of the atmosphere,' and suspended the meeting again.

The COW was reconvened at 1:15 am on Thursday, 11 December.  The Chair introduced FCCC/CP/1997/CRP.6, the final draft of  the Protocol. Discussion began with Article 3. On  aggregating emissions of Annex I Parties (paragraph 1),  RUSSIA noted that its previously introduced quantitative  indicators for limitation of GHG emissions were omitted  from Annex B and stated that the Russian target should say  100% of the 1990 base level. UKRAINE also specified 100%  for itself.

UGANDA proposed returning to the previously proposed first  commitment period of 2006 to 2010. The Chair stated that  delaying the period until 2008 to 2012 was a necessary  compromise and introduced a new paragraph 2 exhorting  Parties to show demonstrable progress by 2005.

On a paragraph on deciding the modalities, rules, and  guidelines for estimating changes in carbon stocks  (paragraph 4), JAPAN proposed adding a sentence specifying  that decisions should apply in the second and subsequent  commitment periods 'unless otherwise decided by the COP  serving as the MOP.' After some debate the Chair ruled that  the amendment was not supported and that the paragraph  would stand as presented. The paragraph was later reopened  by AUSTRALIA, supported by the PHILIPPINES, who proposed  adding 'A Party may choose to apply such a decision on  categories its first commitment period, provided that these  activities are since 1990.' Although the MARSHALL ISLANDS  queried the types of activities to be included, the  addition was approved.

On calculations of QELROs for each Annex I Party (paragraph  7), AUSTRALIA noted a previously submitted amendment that  'Parties in Annex B for whom land use change and forestry  constituted a net source of GHG emissions in 1990 shall  include in their 1990 emissions base the aggregate  anthropogenic CO2 equivalent emissions minus removals in  1990 from land use change' in calculating their assigned  amount. This was agreed.

Delegates spent a considerable portion of the final debate  on Article 3 debating newly inserted paragraphs in the  Chair's text related to emissions trading. Delegates agreed  to place the text to a separate article (see Article 16  bis) of the protocol and including a reference to future  work on trading in a COP decision.

Estrada asked delegates to adopt the revised Annex B,  reflected in document FCCC/CP/1997/L.7/Add.1, in light of  the text agreed for the Protocol. Annex B presents each  Annex I country's commitment target. Combined, these equal  a global 5.2% reduction of six GHGs. Estrada pointed out  that on a graph it could be seen that a 5% reduction from  1990 emission levels would equal a 10% reduction in  emissions of six gases from projected 2000 levels and was  30% below business-as-usual projections for 2010.

The EU asked for a footnote that the European Community and  its Member States will implement their respective  commitments in accordance with the provisions of Article 4,  on the European 'bubble.' ICELAND stated that actions taken  before 1990 make its 110% target unattainable.

TUVALU indicated a mathematical inconsistency between  Article 3.1, stating an aggregate 6% reduction, and the sum  of the figures in Annex B, which represents only a 5.2%  reduction. He noted that negotiations had been undertaken  on the basis of the text in Article 3.1 of the draft  Protocol. The Chair pointed out his earlier statement that  6% was only an estimate based on the options under  discussion, and that the selection of particular options  would affect the numbers. The figure was corrected in the  final version of Article 3.1.

Article 3, as adopted by COP-3, contains 14 paragraphs on  QELROs and refers to Annexes A and B. Annex A lists six  greenhouse gases (CO2, CH4, N2O, HFCs, PFCs and SF6) to  which reduction or limitation targets should apply and  includes GHG source categories and sectors such as fuel  combustion, industrial processes, solvent and other product  use, agriculture and waste. Annex B lists quantified  emission limitation or reduction commitments for Annex I  Parties, which range from an 8% decrease to a 10% increase  of GHG emissions from 1990 levels to be reached in a period  between 2008 and 2012. The EU countries are to reduce GHG  emissions from 1990 levels by 8%, the US by 7%, Japan by  6%, while countries like Australia and Iceland are allowed  increases by 8% and 10%, respectively. The Russian  Federation is to maintain its emissions at 1990 levels. The  overall reduction target of Annex B amounts to 5.2%.

Paragraph 1 states that Parties included in Annex I shall,  individually or jointly, ensure that their aggregate  anthropogenic carbon dioxide equivalent emissions of GHGs  listed in Annex A do not exceed their assigned amounts,  calculated pursuant to their emission limitation and  reduction commitments inscribed in Annex B, with a view to  reducing their overall emissions of such gases by at least  5% below 1990 levels in the commitment period between 2008  and 2012. In paragraph 2, Annex I Parties are urged to make  demonstrable progress in meeting their commitments under  the protocol by 2005.

Paragraph 3 determines that net changes in GHG emissions  from sources and removals by sinks shall be used by Annex I  Parties to meet their QELROs commitments. It defines  removals by sinks as those 'resulting from direct human- induced land use change and forestry activities, limited to  afforestation, reforestation and deforestation since 1990.'  It also defines net changes as 'verifiable changes in  stocks in each commitment period.' Paragraph 4 states that, prior to the first Meeting of the  Parties, each Annex I Party shall provide SBSTA with data  to establish its level of carbon stocks in 1990, to enable  an estimate to be made of its changes in carbon stocks in  subsequent periods. It determines that the Meeting of the  Parties at its first session, or as soon as practicable  thereafter, 'shall decide upon modalities, rules and  guidelines as to how and which human-induced activities  related to changes in GHG emissions and removals in the  agricultural soil and land use change and forestry  categories, shall be added to or subtracted from assigned  amounts for Annex I Parties.' A decision on these issues  shall take into account uncertainties, transparency in  reporting, verifiability, the methodological work of the  IPCC and advice provided by SBSTA. The paragraph also  states that such a decision shall apply from the second  commitment period onwards, unless a Party chooses to apply  the decision to its first commitment period.

Provisions on QELROs commitments and baselines for Annex I  Parties undergoing the process of transition to a market  economy appear under paragraphs 5 and 6.

Paragraph 7 states that for the first commitment period  (from 2008 to 2012), QELROs for Annex I Parties shall be  equal to the percentage of their 1990 or chosen base year  emissions inscribed in Annex B, multiplied by 5. It  determines that Parties shall include in their 1990  emissions base year or period, GHG emissions minus removals  in 1990 from land use change for the purposes of  calculating their assigned amount, if land use change and  forestry constituted a net source of GHGs in 1990.

Paragraph 8 establishes that Annex I Parties may use 1995  as their base year for HFCs, PFCs and SF6, for the purposes  of calculating their reduction or limitation targets in  accordance to paragraph 7. Paragraph 9 determines that  reduction or limitation targets for subsequent commitment  periods shall be established through amendments to Annex B  in accordance with procedures set out in the protocol to  that effect (Article 20, paragraph 7).

Paragraphs 10 and 11 refer to how reduction units acquired  or transferred among Annex I Parties can be applied by such  Parties to reach their reduction or limitation targets.  Paragraphs 12 refers to acquisition of certified emissions  reductions among Parties as a means of meeting QELROs by  Annex I Parties. Paragraph 13 allows Annex I Parties to  'credit' GHG emissions reduction, below assigned amounts,  from one commitment period to the next. Paragraph 14  indicates that Annex I Parties shall strive to implement  their commitments under paragraph 1, in such a way as to  minimize the adverse social, environmental and economic  impacts on developing country Parties, particularly those  identified in Article 4, paragraphs 8 and 9 of the  Convention. It also establishes that the Meeting of the  Parties at its first meeting, shall consider what actions  are necessary to minimize the adverse effects of climate  change and/or the impact of response measures on developing  country Parties. Funding, insurance and transfer of  technology are among the issues to be considered for this  purpose.

ARTICLE 4 (Joint Action/the 'EU Bubble'): On 4 December,  Harald Dovaland (Norway) reported on informal consultations  conducted on Article 4 concerning joint action through a  regional economic integration organization, or the EU  'bubble.' He said that further clarifications were needed  on the meaning of terms within the article and that the EU  was trying to find ways to accommodate delegations'  concerns. Estrada urged the group to continue its  consultations in order to report on progress to the COP as  soon as possible.

On 6 December in the COP, Dovaland summarized the draft on  Article 4. He noted an impasse on two alternatives, one  from the EU and one from other contact group members. The  second alternative emphasizes that allocation of emissions  under the 'bubble' would be legally binding. Another  section would cap rearrangements of allocations, and text  is included to take account of changes in or enlargement of  regional economic integration organizations.

Following adoption of Article 4 by the COW, SAMOA noted  that 'hot air' trading, the possibility that Parties whose  emissions were already below 1990 levels could trade them  as new reductions, was not sufficiently dealt with, and  that this could permit evasion at large scale. He said he  accepted the article in the belief that only the EU would  take advantage of the arrangements.

Article 4, as adopted by COP-3, contains 6 paragraphs  setting out the rules for Annex I Parties who have agreed  to jointly fulfill their commitments under Article 3.  Paragraph 1 states that Annex I Parties shall be deemed to  have met their commitments provided that their total  combined aggregate anthropogenic carbon dioxide equivalent  emissions of GHGs listed in Annex A, do not exceed their  assigned amounts calculated pursuant to their QELROs in  Annex B. The respective emission level allocated to each of  the Parties shall be spelled out in an agreement.

Paragraph 2 determines that the terms of the agreement  shall be notified to the Secretariat on the date of deposit  of the concerned Parties' instruments of ratification,  acceptance, approval or accession. The Secretariat shall,  in turn, inform the Parties and signatories to the  Convention of the terms of the agreement.

Paragraph 3 indicates that the agreement shall remain in  operation for the duration of the commitment period  specified in Article 3.

Paragraph 4 states that if Parties acting jointly do so in  the framework of and together with a regional economic  integration organization, any alteration in the composition  of the organization, after the adoption of the Protocol,  shall not affect existing commitments under the Protocol.

Paragraphs 5 and 6 indicate that in the event of failure by  the Parties to reach such an agreement to achieve their  combined level of emissions reductions, each Party to such  an agreement shall be responsible for its own level of  emissions.

ARTICLE 5 (Methodologies): Article 5 refers to the  obligation by Annex I countries to have in place, no later  than one year prior to the start of the first commitment  period, a national system for the estimation of emissions  by sources and removals by sinks of all GHGs not controlled  by the Montreal Protocol. Guidelines for such national  systems shall incorporate methodologies accepted by the  IPCC and shall be decided upon by the COP acting as the MOP  at its first session.

Methodologies for estimating anthropogenic emissions by  sources and removals by sinks of all GHGs not controlled by  the Montreal Protocol shall be accepted by the IPCC and  agreed upon by COP-3. Where methodologies are not used,  appropriate adjustments shall be applied according to  methodologies agreed upon by the COP acting as the MOP.

One of the paragraphs determines that the Meeting of the  Parties shall regularly review and, as appropriate, revise  such methodologies and adjustments, based on the work of  the IPCC and SBSTA. Any revision to methodologies or  adjustments shall be used only for the purposes of  ascertaining compliance with commitments under Article 3 in  respect of any commitment period adopted subsequent to that  revision.

Another paragraph states that global warming potentials  (GWPs) used to calculate the CO2 equivalence of  anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinks of  GHGs listed in Annex A shall be those accepted by the IPCC  and agreed upon by COP 3. It also states that the COP  acting as the MOP, shall regularly review the global  warming potentials of each gas, taking into account advice  provided by the IPCC and SBSTA. Any revision of GWPs shall  apply to those commitments under Article 3 in respect of  any commitment period adopted subsequent to that revision.

Under the draft decision, the COP would reaffirm that  Parties should use the Revised 1996 IPCC guidelines for GHG  inventories. In a bracketed paragraph, the COP would also  reaffirm that global warming potentials (GWPs) used by  Parties should be those provided by the IPCC based on the  effects of the GHGs over a 100-year time horizon. For  information only, Parties may use another time horizon.  CHINA proposed that GWP should take into account the  inherent and complicated uncertainties involved in GWP  estimation.

SWITZERLAND, supported by HUNGARY, urged SBSTA to further  elaborate on the inclusion of bunker fuel emissions in  overall GHG inventories. JAPAN, opposed by the UK, said  there were 'actual' and 'potential' methods of estimating  emissions and proposed a new paragraph under which the COP  would affirm the 'actual' method for including HFC, PFC and  SF6 emissions in QELROs. The US, supported by NORWAY,  called for using actual methodology where data is  available.

In the final Plenary, delegates adopted a draft decision on  methodological issues related to the protocol  (FCCC/CP/1997/L.5). It reaffirms that:*Parties should use the revised IPCC guidelines for  inventories of GHGs; *data for HFCs, PFCs and SF6, when available, should be  included when reporting on emissions; *global warming potentials used by Parties should be those  provided by the IPCC in its Second Assessment Report (SAR); *emissions based on fuel sold to ships or aircraft engaged  in international transport should not be included in  national totals, but reported separately; and *emissions resulting from multilateral operations pursuant  to the UN Charter shall be reported separately.

ARTICLE 6 (Joint Implementation): Article 6 covers some of  the material from Article 7 of the AGBM-8 negotiating text,  on transfer and acquisition of emission reduction units  (ERUs) between Annex I countries that result from projects  aimed at reducing anthropogenic emissions by sources or  enhancing anthropogenic removals by sinks of GHGs. Criteria  include that the project:*is approved by the Parties involved; *provides reduction in emissions or enhancement of removals  that is additional to any otherwise occurring; *does not acquire ERUs if it is not in compliance with its  obligations under Articles 5 and 7; and * is supplemental to domestic actions for meeting  commitments under Article 3.

It allows for:*further elaboration of guidelines for its implementation,  including for verification and reporting; *authorization of legal entities under a Party's  responsibility to participate in generation, transfer, or  acquisition of ERUs; and *continuing transfers and acquisitions of ERUs while  questions of implementation are resolved, should they  arise, provided that units are not used by a Party to meet  commitments under Article 3 until any issue of compliance  is resolved.

ARTICLE 7 (Submissions by Parties): Article 7 calls on each  Annex I Party to incorporate supplementary information in  its annual inventory of anthropogenic emissions by sources  and removals by sinks of GHGs not controlled by the  Montreal Protocol in order to ensure compliance with  Article 3, and incorporate in its national communication  the supplementary information necessary to demonstrate  compliance with its commitments. It is to submit its  emissions inventory annually and its national communication  as frequently as determined by the MOP. The MOP is to adopt  at its first session, and review periodically, guidelines  for the preparation of the information. It shall also  decide upon modalities for the accounting of assigned  amounts.

ARTICLE 8 (Expert Review of Implementation): Article 8  calls for review by expert review teams of the information  submitted under Article 7 by Annex I Parties, as part of an  annual compilation and accounting of emissions inventories  and assigned amounts and the review of communications. The  review teams shall be coordinated by the Secretariat and  composed of experts selected from those nominated by the  Parties to the Convention and intergovernmental  organizations, as appropriate. The review process shall  provide a comprehensive technical assessment of all aspects  of implementation of the Protocol, and the teams shall  prepare a report for the MOP assessing the implementation  and identifying any potential problems in the fulfillment  of commitments. The Secretariat shall circulate the reports  and list questions of implementation for further  consideration by the MOP. The MOP shall: adopt at its first  session, and review periodically, guidelines for the  review; with the assistance of SBI and, as appropriate,  SBSTA, consider the Parties' information, the expert review  reports, the questions listed by the Secretariat, and any  questions raised by Parties; and take decisions on any  matter required for the implementation of the Protocol.

ARTICLE 9 (Review of the Protocol): Under Article 9, the  MOP shall periodically review the Protocol in light of the  best available scientific information and assessments on  climate change and its impacts and relevant technical,  social and economic information, and take appropriate  action. The first review shall take place at the second  session of the MOP, with further reviews at regular  intervals in a timely manner.

ARTICLE 10 (Advancing the Commitments in FCCC Article 4.1):  Article 10 (Article 12 in the negotiating text) was  addressed in a negotiating group co-chaired by John Ashe  (Antigua and Barbuda) and Bo Kjellén (Sweden).  Industrialized nations favored alternative text under which  all Parties would, inter alia, implement national and  regional programmes containing measures to mitigate climate  change and facilitate adequate adaptation. Developing  countries preferred an alternative stating that developed  countries shall incorporate QELROs and P&Ms into their  national programmes. Developed countries would also specify  measures taken to finance technology transfer, provide  financial resources and assist in meeting the costs of  adaptation. Some delegates expressed concern over who would  bear the costs of proposals to, inter alia, formulate  programmes to improve protection measures for  infrastructure and deploy adaptation technologies.

On 3 December, the negotiating group on commitments under  Article 4.1 met in the afternoon to discuss a Chair's draft  text. Delegates agreed not to discuss three reformulated  paragraphs in the draft, covering national and regional  programmes for GHG inventories and mitigation and  adaptation measures, actions to address climate change, and  reporting, after a group of countries said it preferred to  base discussions on the prior version of those paragraphs.

On 6 December, Kjellén reported that numerous alternative  texts remained to be decided. A document was distributed  outlining the status of negotiation, including alternative  texts and some new proposals. Estrada invited Parties to  negotiate on the basis of Kjellén's alternatives.

In the final COW Plenary, the Chair said there was no  agreement on the entire article. However, he noted  agreement on the article's chapeau and paragraphs on  national inventories, technology transfer, scientific  cooperation, capacity building, national communications and  a reference to FCCC Article 4.8, which were adopted.

The G-77/CHINA said there was no consensus on Alternative  A, which contained a list of programmes and measures for  mitigation and adaptation, and proposed deleting it and  Alternative B, which emphasized technology transfer.  Kjellén said his Co-Chair's text might be substituted for  the paragraphs on which agreement could not be reached.  Estrada asked that the Co-Chair's text be distributed.  After extended debate, the text was accepted.

Article 10, as adopted by COP-3, describes activities all  Parties shall undertake in reaffirming and advancing  implementation of existing commitments in FCCC Article 4.1,  taking account their common but differentiated  responsibilities and national and regional development  priorities, without introducing new commitments for non- Annex I Parties. Where relevant and to the extent possible,  Parties shall formulate programmes for preparation of  national GHG inventories. They shall formulate, implement,  publish and update programmes containing mitigation and  adaptation measures. The programmes would, inter alia,  concern energy, transport, industry, agriculture, forestry  and waste management. Annex I Parties shall submit  information on action under the Protocol. Other Parties  shall seek to include in their national communications, as  appropriate, information on programmes they believe address  climate change, including abatement of GHG emissions  increases, enhancement of removals by sinks, capacity  building and adaptation. Other paragraphs cover cooperation  in technology transfer, scientific research and  observation, and education and training programmes.

ARTICLE 11 (Financial Resources): This article was  discussed in a separate negotiating group chaired by John  Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda). On 6 December, Ashe reported in  COW Plenary that there was disagreement over bracketed  references to provision of financial resources 'through the  financial mechanism' and over guidance to the mechanism.  The PHILIPPINES, on behalf of the G-77/CHINA, proposed  deletion of the text in brackets. Delegates debated whether  reference to the financial mechanism should be retained.  Later in the same session, Ashe introduced a revised draft  text on financial resources.

Article 11 describes financial resources, noting that  Parties shall take into account FCCC Articles 4.4-4.9 in  implementing Protocol Article 10. It states that Annex II  Parties' shall, in accordance with FCCC Articles 4.3 and  11, and through the FCCC financial mechanism: provide new  and additional financial resources to meet agreed full  costs incurred by developing country Parties in advancing  commitments in Protocol paragraph 10(a); and also provide  financial resources needed by developing country Parties to  meet full incremental costs of activities in Article 10,  including technology transfer. Implementation of existing  commitments shall take into account the need for adequacy  and predictability in the flow of funds. The article also  permits provision of financial resources through bilateral,  regional and other multilateral channels.

ARTICLE 12 (Clean Development Mechanism): On 4 December in  the COW Plenary, Luis Gylvan Meira Filho reported on  consultations held on a proposed clean development fund  (formerly Article 18) and said that there was verbal  consensus to include it in the text of the Protocol, but  drafting to that effect was pending.

Much of the negotiations on the CDM took place in informal  bilateral and group discussions lead by the US and Brazil.  The first public debate took place in the final COW  Plenary. Delegates amended references to an executive board  'of the CDM.' The PHILIPPINES, supported by the MARSHALL ISLANDS, FRANCE,  UGANDA, SAUDI ARABIA, TRINIDAD and TOBAGO, the EU and the  NETHERLANDS, proposed deletion of a paragraph stating that  certified emissions reductions from 2000 to the beginning  of the first commitment period can be used to achieve  compliance during that commitment period. FRANCE said COP-4  should consider the paragraph. RUSSIA, COSTA RICA, HUNGARY,  the US, CROATIA, JAPAN, PERU and POLAND opposed the  deletion, as did CANADA, who said joint implementation with  credit was an important notion to retain.

BRAZIL said the paragraph provided an incentive for an  early start. He said he felt it would be important to say  explicitly that reductions obtained from 2000 to the first  commitment period could be used in the first commitment  period. Estrada said he saw no consensus to delete the  paragraph.

The final text on Article 12 defines the clean development  mechanism (CDM). Its purpose is to assist non-Annex I  Parties in achieving sustainable development and  contributing to the FCCC objective, and to assist Annex I  Parties in achieving QELROs. Non-Annex I Parties will  benefit from project activities resulting in certified  emission reductions, and Annex I Parties may use the  certified reductions 'to contribute to compliance with part  of their' QELROs, as determined by the MOP.

The CDM shall be subject to the authority and guidance of  the MOP and supervised by an executive board of the CDM.  Each project's emission reductions shall be certified by  operational entities designated by the MOP based on:  voluntary participation by each Party involved; real,  measurable and long-term climate change mitigation  benefits; and emission reductions additional to any  occurring in the absence of the certified project activity.  The CDM shall assist in arranging project funding as  necessary.

The first MOP shall elaborate modalities and procedures to  ensure transparency, efficiency and accountability through  independent project auditing and verification. The MOP  shall also assure that a share of proceeds from certified  projects is used to cover administrative expenses and to  assist meeting adaptation costs of those developing country  Parties particularly vulnerable to climate change effects.  Participation may involve private and/or public entities,  subject to guidance provided by the CDM executive board.  Certified emission reductions obtained between 2000 and  2008 can be used to achieve compliance in the first  commitment period. The COP serving as the MOP shall, at its  fourth session, analyze the implications of the paragraph  on reductions between 2000 and 2008.

ARTICLE 13 (Meeting of the Parties): After its first  meeting on 2 December, a contact group chaired by Patrick  Széll (UK) reported progress on this article. Discussion  was based on G-77/China proposals tabled at AGBM-8. The  contact group discussed the relationship between the MOP  and the Conference of the Parties, the way in which the  article on the MOP should refer to the review of the  adequacy of commitments under the FCCC, and other  outstanding issues.

On 5 December in the COW Plenary, the Chair of the  negotiating group on institutions and mechanisms (I&Ms),  Takao Shibata (Japan), reported progress in discussions on  articles on the MOP/COP. He said Parties agreed that the  FCCC COP shall serve as the meeting of the Parties (MOP),  having agreed to the principle of functional integration  but legal distinction between the bodies.

Following further discussion, delegates agreed to Article  13, which states that the COP shall serve as the Protocol's  MOP. Parties to the Convention that are not Parties to the  Protocol may participate as observers in the proceedings.  Decisions will be taken only by Parties to the Protocol.  The COP shall perform the functions assigned to it by the  Protocol and shall, inter alia, assess implementation,  examine obligations and seek to mobilize additional  financial resources.

### ARTICLES 14 AND 15

These articles were agreed in the  negotiating group on I&Ms. Under 14 (Secretariat) and 15  (Subsidiary Bodies), the FCCC Secretariat and Subsidiary  Bodies will also serve the Protocol.

ARTICLE 16 (Multilateral Consultative Process): This  article was discussed in the I&Ms negotiating group. The  COP shall, as soon as practicable, consider the application  of the multilateral consultative process to the Protocol.

ARTICLE 16 bis (Emissions Trading): Article 16 bis was a  late addition to the Kyoto Protocol. Originating as part of  the US' COP-2 announcement that it was prepared to make a  legally binding emissions reduction commitment, the concept  of emissions trading was discussed alongside discussions on  QELROs. It began COP-3 negotiations as Article 6 of the  negotiating text produced by AGBM-8 (FCCC/CP/1997/2),  having been bracketed by the G-77/CHINA. This text allowed  any Annex I Party or any other Party making a voluntary  commitment to transfer to or acquire from any other like  Party any of its allowed emissions if the Party was in  compliance with its obligations and had in place a national  mechanism for the certification and verification of  emissions trades. It also set forth criteria for emissions  trading.

The text on emissions trading was dealt with in the QELROs  negotiating group, in informal negotiations, and eventually  as paragraphs of Article 3 in the final COW debate, where  the text was deleted and a different version added as  Article 16 bis.

On 3 December, the negotiating group on QELROs briefly  discussed emissions trading. On 6 December in the COW,  Estrada reported that no agreement had been reached on  alternative text for this article so it would remain as it  appeared in the negotiating document produced by AGBM-8.  CANADA introduced an alternative text, stating that  commitments under Article 3 would be met in a 'cost  effective manner' and 'in accordance with international  rules.' A cap on emissions trading was introduced, as was  text that reporting on emissions trading should be  conducted. Guidelines for the structure and timing of an  emissions trading mechanism were also included.

INDIA, on behalf of the G-77/CHINA, and supported by CHINA  and INDONESIA, reiterated its objection to the concept of  emissions trading, stating that it is extraneous to the  Berlin Mandate and would not lead to GHG emissions  limitation and reduction.

In the COW on 10-11 December the debate continued. CHINA,  supported by INDIA, SAUDI ARABIA, IRAN, TOGO, UGANDA,  NIGERIA, VIETNAM and the UNITED ARAB EMIRATES, proposed  deleting the paragraph on emissions trading, along with two  subsequent paragraphs on including and subtracting  emissions reduction units acquired and transferred,  respectively, in each Party's assigned amount (paragraphs  3.10, 3.11 and 3.12). INDIA stressed that trading should be  based on equitably allocated entitlements.

MEXICO, RUSSIA, ISRAEL, UKRAINE, NAURU, AUSTRALIA, the  REPUBLIC OF KOREA, ROMANIA, JAPAN, ARGENTINA, SAMOA, NEW  ZEALAND, POLAND and SWITZERLAND favored keeping the three  paragraphs as drafted. IRAN suggested that the Secretariat  study the concept for future action. UGANDA, supported by  NIGERIA, specified that future COPs should examines the  merits of trading.

The UK, supported by HUNGARY, TUVALU, GRENADA, SEYCHELLES,  ZIMBABWE, the CZECH REPUBLIC, CHILE, URUGUAY, the  PHILIPPINES, SLOVENIA, AOSIS, ZAMBIA and COLOMBIA, proposed  amending the paragraph to clarify that trading would not be  allowed until appropriate rules and guidelines were agreed  by the COP. The Chair noted the existence of a draft  decision for COP-3 to that effect.

The US stressed its change in position to support for very  deep reductions and, with CANADA, ARGENTINA and NEW  ZEALAND, proposed that COP-4 define relevant rules and  guidelines.

BURKINA FASO proposed deleting language in paragraph 3.10  allowing Parties to engage in emissions trading and on the  supplementary nature of such trading as pertains to  domestic actions toward meeting commitments, along with the  two subsequent paragraphs, and proposed a reference to the  decision to be taken by COP-3 to have COP-4 determine the  modalities, rules and guidelines for emissions trading. The  GAMBIA, MALAWI, KIRIBATI, SAUDI ARABIA, ZAMBIA and IRAN  supported deletion of paragraphs 3.11 and 3.12, if COP-4  was to further consider emissions trading.

However, Estrada, noting that certain Annex I countries  require flexibility mechanisms to take on significant  legally binding commitments, urged delegates to adopt a  decision allowing COP-4 to determine modalities and  guidelines for emissions trading, in particular for  verification, reporting and accountability. This was  supported by KENYA and COSTA RICA.

Estrada said that paragraphs 3.11 and 3.12 were not  intended to come into being before the rules under 3.10  were decided upon. He noted that there was a clear  indication that the room was moving towards adopting a  draft decision for further work by COP-4.

NORWAY and ROMANIA supported developing rules and  guidelines for consideration at COP-4. SRI LANKA proposed  that the COP examine the feasibility of emissions trading  and possibly formulate regulations.

CHINA said that rules, guidelines and regulations for  emissions trading would have to be studied, as suggested in  the draft decision. He also warned that emissions trading  may not contribute to actual reductions in emissions but  shift reductions overseas. He expressed hope that the issue  would not be made a condition for any figures.

Estrada said there was consensus that the COP should study  the conditions for 'the new animal' before it is allowed to  'run wild in different places.' The US agreed there were areas in need of further  consideration and supported the UK amendment, but noted  that emissions trading had been successful and cost  effective in other fora. He said paragraphs 3.11 and 3.12  reflected the understanding Parties had reached.

INDIA also supported the proposals by the UK and Burkina  Faso, noting the issue of entitlement. Supported by UGANDA,  the PHILIPPINES, SAUDI ARABIA, ZIMBABWE, ZAMBIA, IRAN and  COLOMBIA, INDIA suggested further amending paragraph 3.10  to include definition of rules 'for equitable allocation of  initial entitlements for such emissions trading.' ZIMBABWE  proposed a reference to a global ceiling for entitlements  based on contraction and convergence of emissions, to  further address the question of equity. The US strongly  objected to the Indian proposal and said it would make the  system unworkable, but suggested that the proposals from  India and Zimbabwe contained elements that Parties might  wish to address in the future. COLOMBIA proposed a further  amendment on defining rules for equitable allocation of  entitlements for emissions trading.

Estrada suggested separating paragraph 10 from Article 3  and creating a new article on interim arrangements,  including a study.

CHINA described equitable rules as a matter of human rights  and supported the Chair's suggestion that subsidiary bodies  report to the COP on emissions trading.

Estrada then warned that the Parties might be about to  'blow up' the whole possibility of having the agreement and  invited delegations to reflect on the consequences of their  decision they were about to take. It had been understood  for some time that emissions trading would be part of the  flexibility required for some to participate. It had always  been agreed that studies would be necessary. It was  necessary to establish a link between the future work of  the Conference and the items to be adopted. He observed  flexibility on one side of the debate. He recalled that in  his report on the AGBM he had noted that a number of  countries were at first against the adoption of the  Convention, and later against the adoption of the Berlin  Mandate. During the work on the Berlin Mandate these  Parties had not helped. MALAYSIA asked that the issue of  emissions trading be referred to the subsidiary bodies.  Estrada suspended the meeting.

After the break, Estrada proposed removing paragraph 3.10,  and inserting a separate Article 16 bis establishing an  interim arrangement for emissions trading. He also  described a draft decision in which the COP would request  the Chairs of SBSTA and SBI to guide the Secretariat on  preparatory work needed so that COP-4 could consider  methodologies and principles, modalities, rules and  guidelines, in particular verification, reporting and  accountability for emissions trading. He said the text and  draft decision were the only possible consensus. The texts  were adopted at the final Plenary.

The final text of Article 16 bis reads: 'The COP shall  define the relevant principles, modalities, rules and  guidelines, in particular for verification, reporting and  accountability for emissions trading. The Parties included  in Annex B may participate in emissions trading for the  purposes of fulfilling their commitments under Article 3 of  this protocol. Any such trading shall be supplemental to  domestic actions for the purpose of meeting quantified  emission limitation and reduction commitments under that  Article.' Decision FCCC/CP/1997/L.7 requests the SBSTA and SBI Chairs  to give guidance to the Secretariat in preparation for COP- 4, and to allocate work to their respective subsidiary  bodies, on definition of relevant principles, modalities,  rules and guidelines, in particular for verification,  reporting and accountability of emissions trading, pursuant  to Article 16 bis of the Protocol.

ARTICLE 17 (Non-Compliance): In the COP 'stock-taking'  Plenary on 6 December, I&Ms negotiating group Chair Shibata  said delegates had debated two alternatives on procedures  and mechanisms related to non-compliance. Alternative A  would apply to Annex I Parties and penalties would operate  through a clean development fund. Alternative B would apply  to all Parties and any procedures adopted that entailed  binding consequences would be adopted by amending the  protocol. Estrada proposed continuing informal  consultations. The US proposed new text that would, inter  alia, require Parties exceeding their emissions budget for  a given period to reduce the excess amount from subsequent  periods.

Following further discussion, the agreed text for Article  17 states that the MOP shall at its first session approve  appropriate and effective procedures and mechanisms to  determine and to address cases of non-compliance with the  provisions of this Protocol, including through the  development of an indicative list of consequences, taking  into account the cause, type, degree and frequency of non- compliance.

ARTICLE 18 (Dispute Resolution): This article was discussed  in the I&Ms negotiating group. Under this article, the  provisions of the FCCC apply mutatis mutandis.

ARTICLE 19 (Amendments to the Protocol): This article was  discussed in the I&Ms negotiating group and sets out the  process for amending the Protocol, under which amendments  will be adopted by consensus. Failing that, they will be  subject to a three-fourths vote.

ARTICLE 20 (Annexes to the Protocol): This article was  discussed in the I&Ms negotiating group and states that  annexes shall be an integral part of the protocol and  annexes adopted after the Protocol's entry into force  should be limited to lists of a descriptive scientific,  technical or procedural character. Amendments to the  annexes shall be adopted at an ordinary session of the MOP.

ARTICLE 21 (Voting Rights): This article was discussed in  the I&Ms negotiating group and provides that each Party  shall have one vote except in the case of regional economic  integration organizations, which will exercise their right  to vote with a number equal to the number of their member  States.

ARTICLE 22 (Depositary): This article was discussed in the  I&Ms negotiating group and states that the Secretary- General of the UN shall serve as the depositary of the  Protocol.

ARTICLE 23 (Ratification, Acceptance or Approval): This  article was discussed in the I&Ms negotiating group and  states that the Protocol shall be open for signature at the  UN in New York from 16 March 1998 to 15 March 1999.

ARTICLE 24 (Entry into Force): On 5 December in the COW  Plenary, the Chair of the working group on I&Ms, Takao  Shibata, reported progress in discussions on entry into  force. The article contained two alternatives on entry into  force. Alternative A used triggers related to number of  ratifications and a percentage of CO2 emissions.  Alternative B would require [75] or [50] ratifications and  [50%] or [75%] of Annex I Parties.

Estrada proposed specifying 50 Parties and 60% of total  emissions. Shibata reported that most Parties preferred  Alternative A, but suggested requiring 75% of emissions.  Estrada suggested a footnote stating that this percentage  gives veto power for entry into force to one particular  Party. The G-77/CHINA said any figure in excess of 50% was  unacceptable. He could support Alternative B if it required  50 ratifications and 60% of Annex I Parties.

Following further discussions in the COW, delegates agreed  that the Protocol shall enter into force on the ninetieth  day after the date on which not less than 55 Parties to the  Convention, incorporating Parties included in Annex I that  account in total for at least 55% of the total carbon  dioxide emissions for 1990, have deposited their instrument  of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession.

ARTICLE 25 (Reservations) : This article was discussed in  the I&Ms negotiating group and states that no reservations  may be made to the Protocol.

ARTICLE 26 (Withdrawal) : This article was discussed in the  I&Ms negotiating group and states that any time after three  years from the date on which the Protocol has entered into  force for a Party, that Party may withdraw from this  Protocol.

ARTICLE 27 (Original UN language texts): This article was  discussed in the I&Ms negotiating group and states that the  original of this protocol of which the Arabic, Chinese,  English, French, Russian and Spanish text are equally  authentic, shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of  the UN.

# OTHER ISSUES

## Compensation Fund

On 4 December in Plenary, the Chair of  the negotiating group on the proposed compensation fund  (Iran) reported that there were still divergent views on  the issue and that further consultations were needed.

On 6 December, IRAN reported on negotiations on minimizing  the adverse effects of climate change through P&Ms. He  proposed alternative text based on a draft decision by  Zimbabwe and Uganda calling for an SBI review of actions to  meet developing country needs-related adverse effects. Both  contained a bracketed reference to [establishment of  measurements of compensation]. The US, the EU, POLAND,  AUSTRALIA and CANADA said compensation was unacceptable and  the paragraph should be deleted. SAUDI ARABIA, the G-77/CHINA, INDONESIA, UGANDA, URUGUAY, KUWAIT, NIGERIA, the  UNITED ARAB EMIRATES, CHINA, VENEZUELA, BAHRAIN and EGYPT  supported removing the brackets. ZIMBABWE suggested  ministerial consideration of the proposal under FCCC  Article 4.8. NEW ZEALAND objected to compensation, but  supported Uganda's proposal to replace 'compensation' with  'impacts.' The Chair suggested replacing the existing  paragraph with Iran's text, with the entire text bracketed.  Delegates did not engage in further discussions on this  proposal.

Voluntary Commitments: On 4 December in the COW Plenary,  Dámaso Luna (Mexico), reported that further consultations  were needed on voluntary commitments for non-Annex I  Parties (formerly Article 10). In the final COW Plenary,  SAUDI ARABIA, KUWAIT, VENEZUELA, EGYPT, the UNITED ARAB  EMIRATES, SYRIA, MOROCCO, IRAN, BRAZIL, GAMBIA and  BANGLADESH called for deletion of this draft article. INDIA  said the article would create a new category of Parties not  established in the Convention. CHINA said although the  commitments were voluntary in name they would determine a  level of limitation or reduction of anthropogenic  emissions, imposing an obligation that did not apply to  developing countries. The article endangers the non-Annex I  status of Parties joining its activities and imposes new  commitments on developing countries. UGANDA said voluntary  commitments would not be voluntary years from now.

SAMOA, on behalf of 35 Parties and AOSIS, said the  article's activities were entirely voluntary and imposed no  new commitments for developing country Parties. ARGENTINA,  supported by the UK, proposed additional text that would  prohibit arbitrary measures or discrimination against non- Annex I Parties who do not assume voluntary commitments.

HUNGARY, GRENADA, RUSSIA, JAPAN and MICRONESIAsupported  retaining the article. The US said the article strengthened  the protocol by including broader range of countries in  partnership, imposed no new mandates and permitted growth  targets. He proposed adding that emissions limitations  assumed voluntarily should not inhibit economic development  and may constitute a growth budget. The REPUBLIC OF KOREA  said the article was phrased in a way to permit voluntary  assumption of a target without any new commitments. ISRAEL  supported the article and the amendments proposed.

The PHILIPPINES said he supported the concept underpinning  the article, but only concerns represented in the  amendments could be addressed. MEXICO said the article in  modified form could avoid pressure on non-Annex I  countries. He proposed amending the US amendment on  preventing limits to economic growth and development, and  additional text that volunteering Parties should have  access to all modalities of trading but should not be  liable to penalties or fines. He said the idea was to  provide access by non-Annex I Parties to market mechanisms.  Estrada said there was no consensus on the article, so it  should be deleted.

New Zealand Proposal: On 5 December, NEW ZEALAND said Annex  I Parties' constituencies needed assurances that developing  countries would adopt binding emissions limitation  commitments in a third commitment period. He proposed  double conditionality: Annex I Parties needed early  agreement by non-Annex I countries on future commitments,  but non-Annex I Parties would not be held to commitments if  Annex I Parties did not fulfil their Kyoto commitments. He  called for 'progressive engagement' according to relative  levels of development, and exemption for least developed  countries. Supported by the US, CANADA, POLAND, SLOVENIA,  AUSTRALIA, SWITZERLAND and JAPAN, he introduced a draft  text that, inter alia: noted Annex I Party commitments  through 2014; considered that future Annex I commitments  beyond that date should comprise the widest possible  participation in binding action; recognized the dependence  of inception of non-Annex I Parties' legally binding  emissions limitations commitments on Annex I Parties'  implementation, particularly of Kyoto Protocol QELROs;  agreed there should be further QELROs for Annex I Parties  and 'quantified emission limitation objectives' for other  Parties, except least developed countries; and established  a process to set the commitments, to be concluded by 2002.

The EU reiterated that the Berlin Mandate precluded new  commitments for developing countries and underscored that  developed countries must lead the way by adopting legally  binding commitments in Kyoto. He drew attention to IPCC  findings indicating that a significant reduction in  emissions would require efforts by both developed and  developing countries. However, future commitments would  have to take into account the principle of common but  differentiated responsibilities. He suggested continuing  consultations with a view to reaching a satisfactory  result. He said it would be appropriate to start a review  process based on FCCC Article 7.2 with a view to  establishing further commitments for all Parties.

The G-77/CHINA, supported by THAILAND, SAUDI ARABIA, IRAN,  COLOMBIA, MALAYSIA, NICARAGUA, HONDURAS, SYRIA, GHANA,  TOGO, LAOS, KUWAIT, GRENADA, BOTSWANA, BAHRAIN, MALI,  CHILE, PERU, TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO, NIGERIA, BANGLADESH,  KENYA, MOROCCO, ZIMBABWE, INDONESIA, URUGUAY, CENTRAL  AFRICAN REPUBLIC, PHILIPPINES, VENEZUELA, COSTA RICA,  GAMBIA, ARGENTINA and SOUTH AFRICA, on behalf of Southern  African Development Community (SADC), said equity and  common but differentiated responsibilities are keys to  success. He noted the low per capita emissions of  developing countries and their economic and social  development priorities. This is not the time to address  developing country commitments, but to strengthen developed  country commitments. He concluded with one word: 'no.'  INDIA objected to depriving developing countries of  equitable environmental room to grow. BRAZIL said one  developed country statement had implied 'if you don't  deliver, we won't deliver,' to which he replied 'until you  deliver, we don't discuss.' CHINA recalled the performance  of Annex I Parties in meeting existing commitments and  warned the EU: 'beware of your bubble.' HUNGARY said other Parties could follow countries with  economies in transition, who joined Annex I in spite of  economic difficulties. The US stated that commitments for  all Parties must allow for economic growth while  simultaneously protecting the environment. The US wanted  developing countries, except the least developed countries,  to adopt emissions targets to abate the increase in their  emissions. He noted that developing country commitments  could be differentiated in light of respective  responsibilities and capabilities. While acknowledging  efforts by developing countries to address their emissions,  JAPAN pointed to the need for further participation in the  future. He proposed initiating a post-Kyoto process to this  effect. He said that developing country participation does  not mean reduction, but limitation of emissions and  indicated that New Zealand's proposal could serve as a  basis for discussions. CANADA said that the sequencing of  commitments had worked under other agreements.

The G-77/CHINA said the New Zealand proposal should be  dropped and that the group would not participate in a  contact group as a matter of principle. The President said  he would consult the Bureau. The proposal was not discussed  further.

# CLOSING PLENARY

At approximately 1:00 pm on 11 December, Hiroshi Ohki  (Japan) convened the COP-3 closing Plenary to address  pending issues in the agenda (FCCC/CP/1997/1), including  the adoption of a protocol or legally binding instrument.  The adoption of the rules of procedure for the COP  (FCCC/CP/1997/2), was deferred to COP-4. Delegates also  decided that SBSTA and SBI would elect officers other than  Chairs.

COW Chair Estrada said he was happy to submit a Kyoto  Protocol that was unanimously recommended by the COW for  adoption by COP-3. He stated that the Protocol would reduce  overall GHG emissions by 5.2% for Annex I Parties from 1990  levels over a period between 2008 and 2012. He noted that  this meant a 30% reduction of projected emissions by the  year 2012. He pointed out that it had not been easy for  countries to come to an agreement, given the economic and  political implications of some of the concessions that had  been made, and said that the spirit of compromise was an  example to be followed in future negotiations.

He indicated that the Protocol included an annex with  targets for each Annex I country. He drew attention to a  decision to be take by COP-3 (FCCC/CP/1997/L.1) adopting  the Protocol.

The US pointed out that a paragraph under Article 12  stating that 'COP-4, serving as the MOP to the Protocol,  shall analyze the implications of certified emissions  reductions' should not appear in the Protocol, but in the  draft decision that adopts it. NORWAY suggested the  inclusion of another sub-paragraph in the decision on the  elaboration of modalities and procedures for the effective  implementation of an article on a CDM (Article 12). The  Chair invited the COP to adopt the decision without any  additions, considering that the COW had unanimously  recommended it for adoption.

The Kyoto Protocol (FCCC/CP/1997/L.7/Add.1) was unanimously  adopted by COP-3 through a decision that opens it for  signature from 16 March 1998 until March 1999 and requests  the UN Secretary-General to be its depositary. The decision  requests the SBSTA and SBI Chairs to allocate work on a  list of matters to their respective subsidiary bodies and  to give guidance on these matters to the Secretariat in  preparation for COP-4. The list includes the following:*Determination of modalities, rules and guidelines as to  how and which additional human-induced activities related  to changes in GHG emissions and removals in the  agricultural soil and land-use change and forestry  categories shall be added to, or subtracted from, the  assigned amount for Parties included in Annex I, as  provided for in the Protocol under an article on sinks  related to QELROs (Article 3, paragraph 4).

*Definition of relevant principles, modalities, rules and  guidelines, in particular for verification, reporting and  accountability of emissions trading, pursuant to an article  in the Protocol on emissions trading (Article 16 bis).

*Elaboration of guidelines for any Party included in Annex  I to transfer to, or acquire from, any other such Party any  emission reduction units resulting from projects aimed at  reducing anthropogenic emissions by sources or removals by  sinks of GHGs in any sector of the economy, as provided for  in an article on a form of reduction credits (Article 6).

*Consideration of and, as appropriate, action on suitable  methodologies to address the situation of Parties listed in  Annex B of the Protocol for whom single projects would have  a significant proportional impact on emissions in the  commitment period.

*Analysis of the implications of an article on certified  emission reductions (Article 12, paragraph 10).

*The decision also invites the SBI and SBSTA Chairs to make  a joint proposal for the programme of work of the MOP,  after entry into force of the Protocol.

TRININDAD AND TOBAGO, on behalf of AOSIS, recalled that  three years ago, at COP-1, AOSIS had submitted a proposal  for a protocol setting significant GHG reduction targets.  He said that the reduction targets for Annex I Parties in  the Kyoto Protocol were insufficient and that the  underlying moral message they carried was dubious: would  the industrialized world continue to dump its waste? He  said that Parties had not worked all these years to see GHG  emissions increase. He drew attention to the fact that  under the Protocol some developed country Parties were  allowed to increase their emissions while others lowered  theirs, and that this was difficult to understand in light  of scientific facts on global warming. He said that  drafters would bear the blame for future climate change- related damage and disasters, and called upon Parties to  come to COP-4 with clearer commitments. COP-3 adjourned at  approximately 3:30 pm on Thursday, 11 December 1997.

# A BRIEF ANALYSIS OF COP-3 ZEN AND THE ART OF PLANETARY MAINTENANCE

'Falling into the Moon's reflection From a single petal Rings of waves Blown by the breeze Touching each life.' (A Japanese poem or waka by Mahoroba Kaoru selected for  this analysis by FCCC Executive Secretary Michael Zammit  Cutajar. An accompanying interpretation states that each of  our individual actions will together reshape the world.) Parties to the UNFCCC adopted a Protocol with the  unprecedented, legally enforced ambition of limiting and  reducing the greenhouse gas emissions that have accompanied  the rise and rise of the industrial era. Appropriately,  they did so in Kyoto, Japan's capital city of Zen - a  traditional Buddhist practice associated with mindfulness.  During the COP, Executive Secretary Michael Zammit-Cutajar  explained that the Zen path to enlightenment requires a  practitioner to break through mental boundaries imposed by  established ways of looking at the world.

The Kyoto Protocol will become a 21st century koan, a Zen- like riddle or challenge to break through boundaries  imposed by political, economic, technical and cultural  practices deeply embedded in the Annex I capitals of a  development model whose leading export to the rest of the  world is an unsustainable state of mind.

The most immediate constraints on thought lingering in  Kyoto were hangovers from the original FCCC process. They  took the familiar form of hesitations when Parties were  confronted with the prospect of adopting a legally binding  agreement. They remained through the AGBM process that  concluded the Sunday before COP-3, when delegates stuck  fast to their established negotiating positions. And they  help to explain the gaps between the FCCC's stated goal and  actual impact. Parties readily acknowledge the  ineffectiveness of their commitments to alter energy and  economic patterns and thus prevent harmful changes in the  climate system. The Kyoto Protocol will, inevitably, be  described as a first step. Another first step. In the  absence of more ambitious reduction and limitation targets  it can be no more. Moreover, while the question of equity  struggles to find a place in the calculations of  negotiators, the ambition to universalize the imperative of  reducing global GHG trends through expanded participation  by developing countries remains several steps down the  road. In the meantime, the ethical question is condemned to  caricature in exchanges within and with the G-77 and China.

The Executive Secretary's challenge permits a wide range of  interpretations and, like Zen itself, can offer few  conclusive answers before inquirers embark on their own  quest. This analysis will limit itself to three aspects of  what was an intense, intricate negotiating experience:*The strategic paths and influences of the key players; *The utility of a negotiating paradox; and *The question of whether a return to the marketplace can  both serve and reconcile the higher purposes of equity,  climate change protection, and a credible protocol that  sends a strong and clear signal to the stakeholders about  the virtuous path of sustainable energy production and  consumption.

The Zen of Strategy Throughout the negotiating process the EU, the US and Japan  were in constant communication both within the precincts of  the Kyoto International Conference Hall and by telephone.  Meanwhile, the US, including Vice President Al Gore during  his high profile visit to the COP, maintained high-level  contact with key developing country partners. As Zammit  Cutajar suggested, Kyoto was a conference of the hammer and  the hotline. He might have added hype.

While the EU provided the ambition that drove the numerical  targets of the agreed Protocol, the US played an  influential role in shaping the institutional approach to  implementation, notably with emissions trading. With the  latitude provided by an ecologically literate constituency,  the EU targeted US reticence and championed NGO concerns  about proliferating loopholes, including those associated  with sinks and trading. In doing so, the EU was also  targeting the flexibility with which the US and other  JUSSCANZ countries sought to reduce the domestic impact of  the limitation and reductions targets. Celebrated by NGOs  for its role, the EU stumbled a little over its own  institutional clumsiness. The US perception of the EU  approach to the negotiation was this: 'They were having  more fun being green than in being practical. We had to  convince everyone else.' Some tensions emerged when members  of the larger EU group (Germany in particular) resisted  giving the lead negotiators in the Troika - the UK,  Netherlands and Luxembourg - the flexibility they needed to  respond rapidly to new positions and red herrings, notably  those of the US.

There were also tensions over issues such as emissions  trading, with countries such as the UK more culturally  receptive to adopting market-oriented mechanisms than some  others. The EU gained inclusion of policies and measures  according to 'national circumstances' and permission to  form a bubble, relenting on expressed resistance to six  gases, sinks, emissions trading, and broader  differentiation of targets.

The G-77/China - or rather the key players who skillfully  swing the bloc - played an effective role in defeating an  article on voluntary commitments for developing countries,  but left observers wondering whether they would go on to a  broader victory. In a clever play, India and China led off  a debate on emissions trading, ambushing the US and  JUSSCANZ and succeeding in delaying the pace at which  trading will come into effect. In doing so in the closing  hours of the negotiations, they signaled decisive  opposition to the article on voluntary commitments and  exhausted all proponents. As a result, the article on  voluntary commitments was dropped.

The complex, ambiguous and virtual world of G-77/China  'interests' was demonstrated by Brazil's role in brokering  a Clean Development Fund. With US sponsorship, this idea  became the clean development mechanism - a hybrid  institution which brings together credited joint  implementation and emissions trading, all with 'certified'  voluntary developing country participation. US negotiators  attracted other Latin American supporters who, in the words  of one observer, 'had their national interests explained to  them.' The Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) became the focus of  the biggest trade-off of the negotiations, according to one  observer. Even in the face of China and India's continued  resistance, the US and its allies gained considerable  ground with the CDM and declarations supporting voluntary  participation by Mexico, the Republic of Korea and others.

Brazil and the US led development of the CDM. Originally  presented by Brazil as a means of financing projects  through penalties for non-compliance, the CDM, as  established, will facilitate emission reduction projects in  developing countries financed by developed countries. The  developed countries, after the projects and their emissions  are certified, can use those emissions as credits against  their own reduction objectives, a form of joint  implementation with credit the US and others have long  argued for.

The idea gained unstoppable momentum as the US recognized  it as a politically correct avenue for getting some key  developing countries on board. It may also become a  contentious source of off-shore tradable emissions credits  for Annex I countries. Just who stands to gain most from  the CDM will only become clear when outstanding questions  are answered: will the GEF or the World Bank control the  new Mechanism and where will the new institution be  located? Overall, developing countries helped push higher targets by  supporting an emissions reduction position close to that of  the EU. Developing countries vetoed the broad inclusion of  voluntary commitments and a stigmatized form of joint  implementation, and helped craft the CDM, eventually  accepting the flexibility and differentiation approach to  QELROs that they had earlier resisted. Led by the eloquent  Ambassador Slade from Samoa, AOSIS continued to provide the  formative conscience of the Convention and the Protocol  process. AOSIS maintained its moral voice, although the  group's influence within the G-77 was often muted by those  allied to OPEC interests.

NGOs and members of the 'fourth estate' - the media -  played a pivotal role that paralleled the remote  negotiations going on between presidents and prime  ministers. Their experts provided back-up information and  analyses to delegations ready to listen, their  communication experts produced press releases in Kyoto and  at home within hours of developments, and their traditional  activists staged colorful and thought provoking actions  ranging from a Friends of the Earth award for the top dirty  industries and penguins sculptured in ice, to a procession  which raised the specter of the environmental martyrs of  the Ogoni people in Nigeria to link human rights to climate  change politics.

NGOs played a pivotal role in identifying and advising  receptive delegations on loopholes in the proposals,  notably in emissions trading and sinks. At a meeting with  NGOs, Vice President Gore also proved receptive to advice  on moderating the content of his Plenary speech on the need  for developing country commitments.

the Utility of Negotiating Paradox A paradox emerged as major factions in the negotiations  struggled towards higher targets through contrary  approaches. The EU and other supporters of an ambitious  target, such as the G-77/CHINA and AOSIS, decided to hold  out until the US signaled willingness to improve on its  offer of stabilization at 1990 levels. The EU resisted  conceding to the US and JUSSCANZ members on flexibility in  implementation, notably on emissions trading and sinks  criteria. The US and JUSSCANZ required commitments on these  very issues to run the numbers and fix realizable targets.  The standoff was compounded by the late - but long  anticipated - agreement to adopt a differentiation formula  as opposed to a flat rate, together with the traditional  negotiating strategy of taking the process to the wire. The  latter strategy raises the ante and can serve trade  negotiators well, however, it does little to raise the  quality of complex institutional arrangements in the  context of climate change politics.

The conceptual model adopted, the so-called 'Big Bubble'  approach originally suggested by Russia, provided some  scope for groups pursuing both approaches to targets - the  ambitious and the nervous. It allowed Parties to suggest a  global reduction number that was essentially the product of  each Party's calculation of what the policy pieces would  permit them to achieve individually. Each calculation  produced a range of figures which became the zone of  tolerance to be negotiated between those who stood at each  end. Top of the range was the EU. At the bottom were those  countries seeking to actually increase emissions above 1990  levels. The EU had always made it clear that their 15%  negotiating figure was never intended as a unilateral  offer. But differentiation left the group somewhat high and  dry - struggling to develop a fall back position.

Where differentiated targets had been based on complex  formulae of social and economic criteria, the Big Bubble  reduced differentiation to a purely political formulation  and the negotiating process to something which, at times,  had the appearance of a bargain basement-auction. A Russian  delegate recalled how he had been approached by COW Chair  Estrada with an offer, to which he replied: 'Not yet.  Never.' Others compared the process to a shell game, with  frequent second guessing and back tracking once countries  discovered what other Parties had to offer. Within hours of  the close of the conference the US discovered that Japan  had agreed on a lower target than Washington anticipated -  sending one lead negotiator hurtling down the aisle towards  Estrada to demand an explanation from the man who was  largely responsible for cajoling the Annex I Parties into  going as far as they did.

Under differentiation the main criterion became each  country's relative willingness to declare a target level of  emissions related to 1990. From the deeply contemplated  center of each delegation's emissions projections, a lack  of consistent political will emerged as a collective  political non-decision - as if out of nothingness or, in  fact, what one NGO observer described as Estrada's 'black  box.' In finest Zen tradition, the agreement forms itself.

Return to the Market Place If there are precedents for the scope and nature of the  Kyoto Protocol they are not encouraging. One observer  suggested that we look to the IMF's now best forgotten  attempt to regulate global money flows, ambitious commodity  agreements run by now rusting institutions like the Tin  Council, and those lofty plans associated with the New  International Economic Order. The business of America is  business, however, recalled a US negotiator at the close of  the Kyoto deal. So business and the markets will be key to  implementation, via emissions trading and the CDM. The  private sector is also the key target group for the  political signals from Kyoto that business as usual is no  longer an option. Therein lies the second paradox.

It is the economic engine rooms of the world - the US,  Japan and Europe - who have built their power-bases upon  unsustainable technologies and who must now lead the way in  reversing the trends they have led. Moreover, the diplomats  who are responsible for translating the signal into  political reality at home are also among the vanguard of  the cosmopolitan lifestyles.

Another inconsistency in the market-based approach built  into the Protocol, according to another observer, is the US  insistence on flexibility while championing the role of the  market. Clear signals to markets will demand minimum  uncertainty. Tradable permits will be akin to commodities  in a market where some certainty will be important. With  low emissions reductions targets and high flexibility,  great difficulties are anticipated in regulating and  determining compliance. Questions arise as to the value of  the new commodities. A participant at the heart of UN  climate change politics, commenting on the Protocol, feared  that it would not go far enough to ensure that emissions  reductions would be achieved, for the most part, at home.  Instead, there would be a drift towards off-shore  fulfillment of commitments.

So a central concern with the market-driven approach is the  tendency of the market to facilitate an externalization of  the costs or burden. Interestingly, a US representative  conceded to this up to a point. While it was agreed that  the classic General Equilibrium Model can accompany an  externalization of costs, this is viewed by the US  negotiators as a short- to medium-term phenomenon.  Believers in the General Equilibrium Model argue that in a  trading regime, particularly with an advance signal that  the market is about to be launched, people will exercise  their external options early and internal options later. If  the classic model is right, then by 2008-2012 (the first  budget period), the US negotiators believe, they might be  undertaking some 60-90% of their emissions reductions  efforts domestically - because the costs will be lower.  Coincidentally, that would also imply that both the current  and prospective Democratic administrations can look forward  to minimal or only incremental pressure to adapt to climate  change protection at home. Asked if Vice President Gore and  the Clinton administration were in the business of buying  time, the US representative insisted that they were buying  time for the world.

Optimists and those with an interest in talking down the  prospect of a greater emphasis on a regulatory regime take  the view that the political signal already emerging from  Kyoto will be sufficient. An electric utilities lobbyist  said it was too soon to calculate all the implications of  the Protocol - notably the inclusion of SF6 - however one  thing was immediately clear: the impact on his clients  would amount to the equivalent of a 37% budget reduction.  Asked if the signal coming out of Kyoto would be sufficient  to force his clients to step up their work in sinks  enhancement and high efficiency gas turbines, he replied:  'Any more of a signal and we would not be standing here.' Conclusion: The man who has not slept for 14 years Asked for thoughts after the grueling all-night meeting of  the Committee of the Whole at the close of the  negotiations, an Indian delegate told the story of a man  who has been awake for 14 years. Like any good Zen koan,  the story appears to says little about the original  question: how did Kyoto affect climate change policy? The  consensus among the world's scientific community is that  the climate is 'out of kilter' and the human species is, in  all probability, largely responsible. Such is the political  process, however, that it is unlikely that political  leaders have even begun to formulate the most salient  questions, let alone formulate appropriate answers. The  politics of climate change - as demonstrated by the Kyoto  Protocol process - raises dilemmas and paradoxes for  politicians whose careers are framed by the demands of  attending to a development model that must now come under  scrutiny. There is more than the weather out of kilter. And  for more than one reason, the Kyoto Protocol text will have  the quality of a riddle - designed to raise more questions  rather than provide comfortable solutions. Fortunately,  there are two main schools of thought in the Zen tradition.  One holds that the breakthrough to enlightenment comes in a  flash of inspiration. A second, more applicable approach,  advocates an incremental journey of trial and error. And on  the journey the important thing is to tread lightly upon  the earth.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR

### FCCC MEETINGS

The FCCC subsidiary bodies will meet from 2- 12 June 1998 in Bonn, Germany. The subsequent subsidiary  bodies meetings will coincide with the Fourth Conference of  the Parties in Buenos Aires, Argentina, scheduled from 2-13  November 1997. For more information contact the UNFCCC  secretariat in Bonn, Germany; tel: +49-228-815-1000;  fax:+49-228-815-1999; e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.de. Also  try the FCCC home page at http://www.unfccc.de and UNEP's  Information Unit for Conventions at  http://www.unep.ch/iuc.html.

### FOURTH INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON GREENHOUSE GAS CONTROL  TECHNOLOGIES (GHGT-4)

This conference will be held from 30  August - 2 September 1998 in Interlaken, Switzerland. For  information contact: Dr. Baldur Eliasson, Head, Energy and  Global Change, ABB Corporate Research Ltd., Baden-Dättwil ,  Switzerland.; tel: + 41-56-486 80 31; fax: + 41-56-493 45  69 e-mail: baldur.eliasson@chcrc.abb.ch.

### ELEVENTH WORLD CLEAN AIR & ENVIRONMENT CONGRESS (& EXPO)

The Congress is schedule from 13 - 18 September 1998 in  Durban, South Africa. For information contact: Conference  Secretariat, PO Box 36782, Menlo Park 0102, South Africa;  fax: +27 12 460 170 e-mail: wissing@iafrica.com.