---
title: "HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE UNFCCC FOURTH CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES, 2 NOVEMBER 1998"
id: enb1288e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1288e
date: 1998-11-02
abstract: "Delegates to the Fourth Conference of the Parties (COP-4) to the  UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC) heard welcoming  remarks and considered organizational matters. Delegates debated  the COP-4 agenda at length, focusing on the deletion of an item  concerning voluntary commitments for non-Annex I Parties."
---

# PLENARY

Hiroshi Ohki (Japan), President of COP-3, recalled the important  role played by COP-3 in finding an answer to the Berlin Mandate  and said COP-4 faces the challenge of maintaining the political  momentum created in Kyoto. He noted the need to review existing  economic structures and re-examine lifestyles.

Maria Julia Alsogaray, Secretary of Natural Resources and  Sustainable Development of Argentina, was elected President of  COP-4. She noted that while Argentina was not one of the  countries that has 'historic responsibilities' for the climate  change problem, it wished to belong to the group holding future  responsibilities for commitment leading to a solution. She said  she wanted COP-4 to signal a new momentum in the process and  said an action plan for future work should be established here.  While developing countries share the burden of responsibility in  responding to this issue, they have an ethical duty to ensure  sustainable development.

Dr. Fernando de la Rua, Buenos Aires City Government Chief,  observed that Buenos Aires translates as 'good air' and hoped  that this coincidence could be seen as an emblem of this process  and a symbol of the success of COP-4.

Michael Zammit Cutajar, Executive Secretary of the FCCC,  observed that this was the first COP to be held in a developing  country. He anticipated that an action plan with ambitious and  politically firm deadlines would be created as a result of this  meeting. He noted that COP-4 presents an opportunity to  revitalize the FCCC itself, perhaps through strengthening the  transfer of technology and know-how, and financial support. COP- 4 could mark the occasion where the business community increased  its role in combating climate change through efficient programs  conducted in an equitable way.

On organizational matters, the Executive Secretary proposed  changes to the provisional agenda (FCCC/CP/1998/1). SAUDI  ARABIA, supported by KUWAIT, proposed addressing Article 3.14  (adverse impacts) as a separate item on the agenda. MAURITANIA  noted that no objections were raised to the proposed agenda  changes during informal consultations on November 1. The  Executive Secretary proposed expansion of the brackets under  Agenda Item 4(e) to include references to Article 3.14. SAUDI  ARABIA, supported by VENEZUELA, accepted the proposal, but  stressed that discussion under Item 5 (matters related to the  Kyoto Protocol) should allow time for Article 3.14.

On Agenda Item 6 (voluntary commitments by non-Annex I Parties),  ARGENTINA recalled its request to include this item on the  agenda and noted that no consensus had emerged despite its  efforts to encourage consultations.

INDONESIA, on behalf of the G-77/CHINA, said this issue had been  deliberated at length, but no consensus had been reached. He  proposed adoption of the agenda without Item 6. INDIA recalled  that the debate at Kyoto rejected the idea of voluntary  commitments, stating it is not implied in the principle of  common but differentiated responsibilities. SAUDI ARABIA,  KUWAIT, VENEZUELA and ALGERIA cautioned that discussion of the  issue at this stage would be divisive and distract from  discussions of compliance and continuing increases in developed  countries' emissions. BRAZIL described the FCCC as an exercise  in burden sharing, recognizing differentiated responsibilities  between Annex I and non-Annex I Parties. He noted that non-Annex  I Parties are well ahead in meeting their existing commitments  and, with CHINA, cautioned that this item was not intended to  promote the FCCC, but to help some countries avoid existing  commitments. IRAN and UNITED ARAB EMIRATES noted that neither  the FCCC nor the Kyoto Protocol provides for voluntary  commitments and cautioned that the discussion could lead to the  imposition of commitments on developing countries. EGYPT said  that developing countries were entitled to sustainable  development to improve the lives of their people.

CHINA noted that developed country emissions are projected to be  5% above 1990 levels by 2000 and 13% above 1990 levels by 2010.  He distinguished developing country 'survival emissions' from  developed country 'luxury emissions,' and said developing  countries risked losing financial assistance and technology  transfer under the FCCC. He said voluntary commitments would  create a new category of Parties under the FCCC and could  destroy the unity of the G-77/China. He said the COP Presidency  should remain neutral. QATAR, TOGO, CUBA, THAILAND and UGANDA  also supported the G-77/China.

TANZANIA and SOUTH AFRICA said methodological and institutional  issues relating to the flexibility mechanisms, such as the CDM,  should be the focus of deliberation. ZIMBABWE noted that  flexibility mechanisms already seek to further reduce non-Annex  I emissions. SAMOA acknowledged that the Convention and its  objectives stood to gain from a further discussion of voluntary  commitments, but discussion at this stage would be detrimental.  Discussions should focus on what could be expected from  developing countries and initiatives Annex I countries could  take to assist developing countries. COLOMBIA suggested that the  vulnerability of developing nations, rather than their  commitments, be discussed. CHILE said several developing  countries were making serious efforts to limit GHG emissions and  favored an exchange of views on voluntary cooperation, without  entailing binding obligations or ignoring the principle of  common but differentiated responsibility.

AUSTRALIA, in supporting Argentina's bid to include Item 6 on  the Agenda, noted that Annex I countries alone cannot fulfill  the goals of the FCCC. She said it was a sensitive issue that  should be discussed in a non-controversial manner. With JAPAN,  she said that non-Annex I Parties wishing to adopt voluntary  commitments must be given an opportunity to consider their  options under the Kyoto Protocol through discussion.

The US expressed regret that divisions among Parties would  prevent delegates from putting all the issues on the table at  this session. She said that locking doors to discussion would  hinder understanding. An open and full discussion on options  could clarify a number of questions. These include: how Parties  would join Annex B; how base years would be determined; how  Parties would develop targets; and whether Parties would still  be able to host CDM projects. With JAPAN and CANADA, NEW ZEALAND  supported a discussion on this item. He said if this were not  done, the President should use her prerogative to facilitate  informal consultations. NORWAY supported the right of a Party to  bring forward an issue for discussion, but left the method of  conducting the discussion to the discretion of the President.

The RUSSIAN FEDERATION reminded delegates that within 15 years,  emissions from non-Annex I countries would exceed those of Annex  I countries. The CZECH REPUBLIC, with HUNGARY and SLOVENIA,  supported the inclusion of Item 6 and noted that it could foster  useful debate and dialogue. POLAND said if Parties wanted to  adhere to FCCC goals, they should be encouraged to assume  voluntary commitments. This dialogue would reflect the dynamic  situation in the global economy and changes within Parties.

AUSTRIA, on behalf of the EU, said the question of broadening  commitments in the long term is necessary and unavoidable. He  recognized what has been achieved by many non-Annex I countries.  He said it may not be possible to resolve this issue in plenary  and proposed that the COP President make a decision on how to  proceed. KOREA said his country was not in a position to take on  binding commitments for several years, but supported convening  informal discussions.

ARGENTINA said no aspect of the FCCC and the Protocol limited  its ability to raise the issue of voluntary commitments. He said  the manner in which delegates address the issue would require  discussion. Delegates adopted the provisional agenda without  Item 6, as no consensus existed on its inclusion. The President  noted that as several Parties had expressed interest in  continuing discussion, she would facilitate informal  consultations. CHINA cautioned against the proposed informal  consultations, stating they could jeopardize the neutrality of  the presidency. INDIA and SAUDI ARABIA observed that the item  had been deleted because there was no consensus on further  discussion. Voluntary commitments should not be considered and  the President should not participate in consultations.

Regarding the election of officers, the following delegates were  elected: Papa Cham (the Gambia); Mohamed Al Sabban (Saudi  Arabia); T. Gzirishvili (Georgia); Harald Dovland (Norway); Ole  Ploughmann (Denmark); Espen Rønneberg, (Marshall Islands); John  Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda); Bakary Kante (Senegal); Kok Kee Chow  (Malaysia); and Maciej Sadowski (Poland).

Delegates also reviewed reports on the work on the subsidiary  bodies as presented by their respective chairs. SBSTA Chair Kok  Kee Chow (Malaysia) presented document FCCC/SBSTA/1998/5 and SBI  Chair Bakary Kante (Senegal) presented document FCCC/SBI/1998/6.  AG13 Chair Patrick Széll (UK) stated that the group reached  agreement on its final report with the exception of bracketed  text regarding the membership of the Multilateral Consultative  Committee (MCC). Some Parties had insisted on equal  representation of Annex I and non-Annex I Parties, but the G-77/CHINA said membership should be based on equitable geographic  representation. The President said she would consult with the  Bureau and report to the Plenary on 6 November.

Delegates considered a draft decision on the attendance of  intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations at contact  groups (FCCC/CP/1998/L.1/Rev 1). SAUDI ARABIA said Rule 7 of the  draft rules of procedure (FCCC/CP/1996/2) provided for the  attendance of observers and there was no need for the draft  decision. The Executive Secretary recalled that the draft  decision was in response to a specific request of the SBI as  contained in its report (FCCC/SBI/1998/6). The CENTRAL AFRICAN  REPUBLIC, SWITZERLAND and the US noted the FCCC stands to  benefit from NGO and IGO experiences. The President noted that  the draft decision contained not only rules, but also ways of  acting in contact groups. Delegates accepted the draft decision.

A number of countries also presented general statements that  outlined their domestic and international programmes, and  elaborated their expectations for COP-4 and future negotiations.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

Delegates opposed to the host country's initiative on 'voluntary  commitments' and the COP President's compromise proposal for  informal consultations are preparing to stand guard over the  remaining deliberations to ensure that the issue does not re- enter the formal deliberations. One concern is whether and how  the issue might re-emerge under the guise of other agenda items  such as the second review of adequacy of Convention commitments  (Item 4 (d)). Delegates have noted there are a number of  outstanding issues to be resolved under the Convention and  several Protocol elements to be elaborated. These issues should  take precedence at this point in the negotiations.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### SBI

SBI will meet at 10:00 am in Plenary I.

### SBSTA

SBSTA will meet at 10:00 am Plenary II.p