---
title: "SUMMARY OF THE SECOND CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE:: 8 - 19 JULY 1996"
id: 1238000e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/1238000e
date: 1996-07-19
abstract: "The Second Conference of the Parties (COP-2) to the United  Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC) met in  Geneva from 8-19 July 1996. More than 1500 participants from  governments, intergovernmental organizations and NGOs took  part in the meetings. While many of the more contentious  issues, such as treatment of the IPCC Second Assessment  Report (SAR), were left unresolved COP-2 did produce some  important political statements. The COP concluded by noting  the 'Geneva Declaration,' which endorses the IPCC  conclusions and calls for legally binding objectives and  significant reductions in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions."
---

The Conference also saw a significant shift in position by  the US, which for the first time supported a legally binding  agreement to fulfill the Berlin Mandate. However, even as  Parties prepared to strengthen commitments, COP-2  highlighted the sharpest differences yet between  delegations. The strong declarations of support for the SAR  were far from unanimous, suggesting the need for substantial  work in future sessions of the COP's subsidiary bodies  before COP-3 in Kyoto, Japan, in December 1997.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FCCC

Increasing scientific evidence in the 1980s about the  possibility of global climate change led to a growing  consensus that human activities have been contributing to  substantial increases in the atmospheric concentrations of  greenhouse gases. In response, in 1990, the 45th session of  the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution that  established the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee for  a Framework Convention on Climate Change (INC/FCCC) to  prepare an effective convention. The INC held five sessions  between February 1991 and May 1992. The UN Framework  Convention on Climate Change was adopted on 9 May 1992, and  was opened for signature at the UN Conference on Environment  and Development in June 1992 in Rio de Janeiro, where it  received 155 signatures. The Convention entered into force  on 21 March 1994, 90 days after receipt of the 50th  ratification. To date, the Convention has been ratified by  almost 160 countries.

The first meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the UN  Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP-1) took place in  Berlin from 28 March - 7 April 1995. Delegates reached  agreement on what many believed to be the central issue  before COP-1 - adequacy of commitments. The result was a  mandate to launch a process toward appropriate action for  the period beyond the year 2000, including the strengthening  of the commitments of developed countries. Delegates also  reached agreement on a number of other important issues,  including the establishment of a pilot phase for  implementation of joint projects, the location of the  Permanent Secretariat in Bonn, Germany, the budget for the  Secretariat, financial procedures and the establishment of  the subsidiary bodies. Delegates, however, did not reach  consensus on the rules of procedure. This critical issue,  including a decision on the voting rules and the composition  of the Bureau, was deferred until COP-2.

## AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE (AGBM)

COP-1 established an open-ended Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin  Mandate (AGBM) to begin a process to strengthen the  commitments of industrialized countries to reduce greenhouse  gas emissions beyond the year 2000 through the adoption of a  protocol or other legal instrument.

At its first session (AGBM-1), held in Geneva from 21-25  August 1995, delegates considered several issues, including  an analysis and assessment to identify possible policies and  measures for Annex I Parties and requests for inputs to  subsequent sessions. They debated the nature, content and  duration of the analysis and assessment and its relationship  to other aspects of the process. Several developed and  developing countries stressed that analysis and assessment  should be conducted in parallel and not prior to the  negotiations, but a few developing countries insisted that  more time was needed, particularly to evaluate economic  costs.

At AGBM-2, held in Geneva from 30 October - 3 November 1995,  debate over the extent of analysis and assessment continued,  but delegates also heard new ideas for the structure and  form of a possible protocol. Delegates considered:  strengthening of commitments in Article 4.2 (a) and (b)  regarding policies and measures, as well as Quantified  Emission Limitation and Reduction Objectives (QELROs) within  specified time-frames; advancing the implementation of  Article 4.1; and possible features of a protocol or other  legal instrument.

At AGBM-3, held in Geneva from 5-8 March 1996, delegates  heard a number of specific proposals on new commitments for  Annex I Parties, including a two-phase CO2 emissions  reduction target proposed by Germany. They also discussed  how Annex I countries might distribute or share new  commitments, and whether those should take the form of an  amendment or protocol. Developing countries raised questions  on whether policies and measures under discussion would  represent barriers to trade. Delegates agreed to compile  proposals for new commitments for consideration at AGBM-4,  and to hold informal roundtable discussions on policies and  measures as well as on QELROs.

## SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE  (SBSTA)

SBSTA was established by COP-1 to link scientific, technical  and technological assessments, information provided by  competent international bodies, and the policy-oriented  needs of the COP. The first meeting of the SBSTA (SBSTA-1)  was held in Geneva from 28-30 August 1995. Delegates  confronted technically and politically complex issues,  including: scientific assessments, national communications  from Annex I Parties, methodologies, first communications  from non-Annex I Parties, and activities implemented jointly  under the pilot phase. The SBSTA was supposed to establish  intergovernmental technical advisory panels on technologies  (TAP-T) and methodologies (TAP-M), however, it did not have  time to consider all of these issues. Among the more  contentious issues were definition of SBSTA's relationship  with the IPCC, the terms of reference and composition of the  TAPs and the elaboration of guidelines for national  communications from non-Annex I Parties. Delegates  successfully identified areas for cooperation with the IPCC,  agreed on a division of labor with the SBI on technology  transfer issues, and requested the Secretariat to organize a  workshop on non-governmental inputs. However, no progress  was made on the formation of the TAPs and delegates had to  resume this discussion at SBSTA-2.

SBSTA-2, held in Geneva from 27 February - 4 March 1996,  considered scientific assessment and cooperation, including  the SAR, reporting by Annex I and non-Annex I Parties,  activities implemented jointly (AIJ) and the Technical  Advisory Panels (TAPs). The main result was that Parties  documented that they could not yet agree on how to absorb or  respond to scientific predictions of climate change.  Although initial discussions gave the impression that SBSTA- 2 would greet the IPCC's predictions with less resistance  than in previous FCCC negotiations, oil producers and other  developing countries ultimately blocked consensus on  specific conclusions about the SAR. Weekend negotiations  resulted in a fragile agreement on language defining the  divergence of opinion. Three paragraphs in the SBSTA's  report list points of contention, alternately highlighting  the urgency and uncertainty in the IPCC report of a  'discernible human influence' on climate change. One line of  the SBSTA's conclusions tells the story of the TAPs: at this  stage the SBSTA could not agree on modalities.

## SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION (SBI)

The first meeting of SBI (SBI-1) took place from 31 August -  1 September 1995 in Geneva. The SBI addressed:  communications from Annex I Parties; a progress report on  in-depth review; institutional and budgetary matters;  matters relating to the financial mechanism; and the  elaboration and scheduling of the programme of work for  1996-1997. Delegates rapidly adopted SBI's work programme  and recommended that the COP adopt the draft Memorandum of  Understanding with the GEF as the financial mechanism, and  proposed a draft decision on this item to be adopted by COP- 2.

At SBI-2, held in Geneva from 27 February - 4 March 1996,  delegates considered in-depth reviews of national  communications, matters related to the financial mechanism,  financial and technical cooperation, transfer of technology,  arrangements for the relocation of the Secretariat to Bonn  and COP-2. SBI-2 delegates could claim some measurable  progress, yet comments on the floor frequently highlighted  what had not been done to implement the Convention. While  delegates welcomed the GEF Council's adoption of its  operational strategy, many noted the need to expedite the  process of providing 'full agreed costs' for non-Annex I  communications or risk serious delays. Developing countries  frequently noted that providing funds to the GEF and  providing funds to countries were not the same thing. SBI's  review of in-depth reports revealed that many delegations  found the national communications in need of comparability  and consistency. The problem of membership distribution  provoked several lengthy debates on the composition of the  Bureau, a question pending since COP-1. Despite numerous  consultations, the issue remained outstanding.

## AD HOC GROUP ON ARTICLE 13 (AG-13)

At its first session, the Ad Hoc Group on Article 13 decided  to request Parties, non-Parties, and intergovernmental and  non-governmental organizations to make written submissions  in response to a questionnaire on a multilateral  consultative process (FCCC/AG13/1995/2, para. 17). Nineteen  Parties, one non-party and ten NGOs submitted responses,  which were compiled in documents FCCC/AG13/1996/MISC.1 and  MISC.2. The documents provide a spectrum of views on the  multilateral consultative process and identify common areas  of understanding.

# REPORT OF THE CONFERENCE

The Second Conference of the Parties to the UN Framework  Convention on Climate Change opened on Monday, 8 July 1996.  At the end of the first day, the Plenary suspended its work  to allow the COP's four subsidiary bodies to meet. The  Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice  (SBSTA), the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI), the  Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate (AGBM), and the Ad Hoc  Group on Article 13 (AG-13) met from 9-16 July. COP-2  resumed on 17 July with a high-level segment consisting of  two plenary sessions and an informal roundtable, before the  closing Plenary convened on 19 July to review and adopt the  decisions put forth by the subsidiary bodies.

## OPENING PLENARY

Angela Merkel, Federal Minister for the Environment, Nature  Conservation and Nuclear Safety (Germany) and COP-1  President, opened the Conference and noted that the time- frames specified by the Berlin Mandate are very ambitious. A  convergence of views on central issues is not yet in sight.  The SAR's results are alarming. The results of the review of  the first national communications of Annex I Parties are a  matter of concern. Fifteen developed countries accountable  for 55% of the greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions of the Parties  currently expect emissions levels by the year 2000 to exceed  those of 1990. She called for ambitious reduction targets in  the short and medium term.

Merkel then introduced Item 2 of the Provisional Agenda, the  election of COP-2 President Chen Chimutengwende, Minister of  Environment and Tourism (Zimbabwe). In his opening  statement, Chimutengwende said outstanding issues included  reporting by Annex I Parties, preparation of guidelines for  submission of initial communications by non-Annex I Parties,  new and additional financial resources to meet the agreed  full incremental costs incurred by developing country  Parties, the role of the GEF, and the role of activities  implemented jointly and other mechanisms.

The Plenary then heard statements from: Nitin Desai, UN  Under-Secretary General, delivering the message of the UN  Secretary General; Claude Haegi, State Counselor of Geneva;  Michael Zammit Cutajar, FCCC Executive Secretary; G.O.P.  Obasi, Secretary General of the World Meteorological  Organisation (WMO); Elizabeth Dowdeswell, Executive Director  of the UN Environment Programme (UNEP); Bert Bolin, Chair of  the IPCC; Mohamed El-Ashry, Chair and CEO of the GEF; Robert  Priddle, Executive Director of the International Energy  Agency of the OECD; Anders Wijkman, UN Development Programme  (UNDP); and Assad Kotaite, Executive Director of the  International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).

The President then invited adoption of the programme of  work. The RUSSIAN FEDERATION proposed that the Plenary be  extended to allow the Parties to determine how the SAR  should be used in making decisions, particularly regarding  the Berlin Mandate and how countries will fulfill their  obligations. He said these decisions should not be made by  the subsidiary bodies. The Executive Secretary noted that  Items 3, 4(a) and (b) of the provisional agenda for SBSTA  stipulate that the subsidiary bodies will make initial  recommendations on which the Parties will vote. SBSTA Chair  Tibor Farago (Hungary) said his group would report its  findings on the SAR to the COP. SAUDI ARABIA cautioned  against a selective approach to the SAR findings.

Parties then adopted the agenda (FCCC/CP/1996/1). Under Item  4(a) on National Communications from Parties included in  Annex 1, the President reported that the United Republic of  Tanzania and Qatar are to become signatories to the FCCC  before the end of the Conference, and Israel will become a  non-Annex I Party in August. The Czech Republic, Monaco, and  Slovakia have applied to become Annex I Parties. Introducing  Agenda Item 4(b), Adoption of the Rules of Procedure, the  President said he would conduct consultations to resolve the  issue of rule 42 (voting). SAUDI ARABIA said agreement on  rule 22 (election of officers) is also pending. Rule 22  should be limited to regional group representatives. The  President said each of the five regional groups are to be  represented by two Bureau members and one Bureau member will  represent the small island developing States (SIDS). SAUDI  ARABIA objected to the nomination of a Bureau member from  Samoa to represent the SIDS. The US said it was important to  follow precedent in the election of officers to the Bureau  and include the SIDS nominee. Parties proceeded to the  election of the Bureau. GERMANY said the SIDS were  represented in the Bureau of the INC in 1991. SAUDI ARABIA  said he could not support the elections as proposed. The  President postponed the election of vice-presidents.

## OTHER PLENARY MEETINGS

On Wednesday, 10 July, the Plenary met to discuss Agenda  Items 4(d) and 4(f), election of officers other than the  President and the Ministerial Segment. The President  reported that consultations on the rules of procedure would  continue as new proposals have been introduced. Application  of the draft rules will continue until a consensus is  reached. The following delegates were elected to the Bureau:  Alexander Bedritsky (Russian Federation), Rene Castro  Hernandez (Costa Rica), John Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda),  Anthony Clark (Canada), Cornelia Quennet-Thielen (Germany),  Tuiloma Neroni Slade (Samoa), and Abbas Naqi (Kuwait) as  vice-presidents, and Antonio G.M. La Viña (Philippines) as  Rapporteur. SAUDI ARABIA and KUWAIT expressed concern about  the COP's failure to adopt the rules of procedure and said  that a compromise must be reached soon.

It was announced that the High-Level Segment will consist of  three plenary sessions and one informal Round Table meeting  to be chaired by Ruth Dreifuss (Switzerland). Plenary  statements will be limited to five minutes and entry to the  Round Table will be restricted to heads of delegations at  the ministerial level. SAUDI ARABIA, supported by the  REPUBLIC OF KOREA, the US, IRAN and BANGLADESH, objected to  restricting the Round Table to ministers, saying all heads  of delegations should be welcome regardless of rank. To do  otherwise would prejudice those delegations not able to send  ministers. Increased transparency was also recommended. The  President agreed to consider the recommendations and report  back to the Plenary.

On Friday, 12 July, the Plenary considered Agenda Item 3(b),  Other statements. IRAN announced its ratification of the  FCCC. He said the SAR confirms that it is not scientifically  possible to link climate change and GHGs. TURKEY explained  that it had not signed the FCCC because its status as a  developed or developing country is uncertain. SOUTH AFRICA  said ratification has been slow and it has begun an  inventory of internal emissions. OPEC stated that the IPCC  'broke the rules' by implying consensus among scientists in  its conclusions. He called for full compensation for any  economic damage arising from the implementation of the FCCC.  Statements were also made by several IGO and NGO  representatives.

The Plenary also considered Agenda Item 9, Special Session  of the UN General Assembly) and decided that SBI-4 should  prepare a contribution to the Special Session on Agenda 21.

## SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE

SBSTA Chair Tibor Farago (Hungary) opened the third session  by noting the deadlocked state of many SBSTA issues and  expressing hope that the spirit of cooperation would  prevail. After a brief discussion during which VENEZUELA and  KUWAIT suggested that a written report accompany SBSTA  decisions, delegates adopted the provisional agenda for the  session (FCCC/CP/1996/1/Annex I).

### CONSIDERATION OF THE SAR

The Secretariat then introduced  documents concerning consideration of the SAR  (FCCC/SBSTA/1996/7/Rev. 1) and three addenda. He recalled  the report of SBSTA-2 (FCCC/SBSTA/1996/8) and highlighted  two paragraphs, one noting some delegations' acknowledgment  of specific findings, the other expressing some delegations'  view that it would be premature to give effect to specific  findings. IPCC Chair Bert Bolin recommended that the SBSTA  should not elaborate on specific findings but discuss the  results more generally with the aim of taking political  action and setting targets.

Many delegations, including the EU, the US, CANADA,  ARGENTINA, the REPUBLIC OF KOREA, COLOMBIA, NEW ZEALAND,  BANGLADESH, NORWAY, FIJI, URUGUAY, MAURITIUS, JAPAN, BENIN,  SWITZERLAND, MYANMAR, BULGARIA, SAMOA, MICRONESIA, the  MALDIVES, NIUE, the MARSHALL ISLANDS and COSTA RICA,  endorsed the SAR as the most comprehensive assessment of  scientific information on climate change available and  viewed it as a basis for urgent action.

The RUSSIAN FEDERATION disagreed, saying that the SAR fails  to identify the permissible level of human impact on the  climate system. SAUDI ARABIA, OMAN, KUWAIT, the UNITED ARAB  EMIRATES (UAE), VENEZUELA, IRAN, NIGERIA and AUSTRALIA  thought it would be premature to make recommendations,  citing a lack of certainty in the SAR data. The following  views were also expressed: INDIA said natural climate  variation and the effects of extraterritorial activities on  climate change should be studied in greater detail; PAKISTAN  and GEORGIA thought the SAR should be amended to reflect  regional differences in climate change; and the PHILIPPINES,  INDONESIA, BRAZIL and others said the SAR should be used as  a comprehensive whole and not selectively. A 'Friends of the  Chair' group was formed to try to reach consensus regarding  the use of the SAR. While Parties agreed that the IPCC  should be commended for its work and encouraged in its  continued cooperation with the SBSTA and the AGBM, the group  was unable to resolve the key issue of the SAR's use as a  basis for action.

SBSTA submitted its draft decision (FCCC/CP/1996/L.11) to  the COP with two bracketed paragraphs, the first noting some  delegations' view that the SAR should be used as a basis for  urgent action to implement the FCCC, and the second noting  other delegations' opinion that the SAR should only be taken  into account during consideration of the implementation of  the FCCC, given the lack of scientific certainty in some of  its findings. Both paragraphs were deleted, however, when  considered in the closing Plenary.

### COMMUNICATIONS FROM ANNEX I PARTIES

With regard to national  communications from Parties included in Annex I, a possible  revision of guidelines was circulated (FCCC/SBSTA/1996/9).  JAPAN and the US proposed a separate informal session to  revise the guidelines and a joint contact group between the  SBSTA and SBI was established for this purpose. The G-77/CHINA, COLOMBIA, MARSHALL ISLANDS, MICRONESIA,  UZBEKISTAN, INDIA and others said Annex I countries should  communicate GHG emission limitations and their commitments  concerning financial resources and technology transfer.  MOROCCO said capacity building mechanisms should also be  included. The EU supported expanding the minimal information  required and suggested that revised guidelines include  targets and timetables. AUSTRALIA called for the inclusion  of performance indicators. BULGARIA, HUNGARY, POLAND and  ROMANIA sought flexibility in report preparation for Parties  with economies in transition and approval to use years prior  to 1990 as their base years.

In its decision FCCC/CP/1996/L.13, the contact group  proposed some amendments to current guidelines and continued  review of the guidelines at SBSTA-4. This decision was  adopted by the COP at the Closing Plenary.

### COMMUNICATIONS FROM NON-ANNEX I PARTIES

A joint contact  group involving both SBSTA and SBI delegates was also formed  to address communications from non-Annex I Parties. The  group established that its work would not be prejudiced by  the COP's initial decisions on guidelines for communications  on the abatement of emissions. Several delegations,  including CHINA, KUWAIT, INDIA, COSTA RICA, the PHILIPPINES,  CANADA, the US and JAPAN, acknowledged the cooperative  efforts of non-Annex I Parties and endorsed their expanded  reporting responsibilities. These include national  inventories of anthropogenic GHG emissions and their  removals by sinks, proposed steps to implement the  Convention and, where possible, material relevant to global  emission trends. Non-Annex I countries should also specify  their development priorities, objectives and circumstances  under which they will address climate change. The  PHILIPPINES stated that non-Annex I Parties' increased  responsibilities should be reflected in funding mechanisms.  The group's decision (FCCC/CP/1996/L.12) was adopted by the  COP during the Closing Plenary.

### ACTIVITIES IMPLEMENTED JOINTLY

On AIJ, delegates considered  an annual review of progress under the pilot phase  (FCCC/CP/1996/14 and Add 1). While most delegations were  generally supportive of AIJ, several, including the G-77/CHINA, COLOMBIA, INDIA, URUGUAY, the PHILIPPINES and EL  SALVADOR, expressed the need to better distinguish between  AIJ projects and those implemented jointly between Annex I  Parties. They said financing and technology transfer for AIJ  projects must be supplemental to what is stipulated in the  FCCC. The US, JAPAN, PANAMA, COLOMBIA, AUSTRALIA and others  supported workshops for AIJ and many delegations recommended  use of a uniform reporting format that is not onerous for  developing countries.

The PHILIPPINES and EL SALVADOR highlighted the need for  capacity building and analysis of social impacts for AIJ  projects. The NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REGULATORY UTILITY  COMMISSIONERS said that AIJ should be a permanent part of  the FCCC process. NORWAY thought it was premature to draw  conclusions from the pilot phase at this time and proposed  the establishment of an AIJ forum at SBSTA's December 1996  meeting. CHINA and MALAYSIA suggested postponing AIJ  workshops until after COP-3 to avoid basing decisions on  incomplete information. IRAN said the cost-effectiveness of  AIJ projects should be considered and noted that some  projects have been financed with GEF funds.

A joint SBSTA and SBI contact group recommended that the COP  continue the AIJ pilot phase and invited Parties to continue  reporting under the initial reporting framework adopted by  SBSTA during its second session (FCCC/CP/1996/L.7). This  decision was adopted by the COP at the Closing Plenary.

### DEVELOPMENT AND TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGIES

Regarding the  development and transfer of technologies, delegates reviewed  the initial report on an inventory and assessment of  technologies (FCCC/SBSTA/1996/4/Add. 2) and a follow-up  report (FCCC/CP/1996/11). The EU said priority should be  given to identifying technology needs. IRAN and the US  called for the establishment of an information  center/clearinghouse for technology transfer. CANADA called  for the creation of an environment enabling input from the  private sector. The NETHERLANDS and the INTERNATIONAL ENERGY  AGENCY described the Climate Technology Institute, an  initiative to support the FCCC in addressing technology  transfer needs.

On reconsideration of the issue, the Chair reported that it  is a shared responsibility of SBSTA and SBI, and that SBI  would take SBSTA's views on the issue and manage its  progress through an open-ended working group. The working  group recommended the following actions (FCCC/CP/1996/L.16),  which were adopted by the COP during its final Plenary:  enhancement of reports on access to and transfer of  environmentally sound technology; prioritizing the  completion of a survey on initial technology needs; active  consideration of the Climate Technology Initiative; the  expedition of reports on adaptation and mitigation  technologies; the preparation of a roster of experts; and  the organization of a technology transfer roundtable at COP- 3.

### MECHANISMS FOR CONSULTATIONS WITH NGOS

Delegates also  considered issues concerning mechanisms for consultations  with NGOs (FCCC/SBSTA/1996/11 and FCCC/SBSTA/1996/Misc. 2).  The EU, JAPAN and others strongly supported the role of NGOs  and remained open to tailoring different consultative  mechanisms for different NGO constituencies. Recognizing the  important role of industry in implementation of the FCCC,  NEW ZEALAND and CANADA endorsed the development of a  business consultative mechanism, although CANADA opposed  open access to NGOs on the floor during negotiations. The US  said expanding access to only one type of NGO would be  inappropriate and suggested that existing consultative  channels for all NGOs be strengthened. A representative from  the environmental NGOs supported the US position and sought  expanded access to the floor during negotiations. In  contrast, a representative from the business NGOs supported  the development of a business consultative mechanism given  industry's ultimate role in implementation, but added that  any process should be transparent. The Chair requested that  New Zealand take the lead in forming a contact group on the  issue.

NEW ZEALAND later presented the draft results of the group,  which recommend that the Secretariat further explore current  consultative mechanisms and propose procedures to improve  their efficiency. No formal decision was taken on this  issue. It will be considered at future SBSTA sessions.

On the roster of experts, the EU supported establishing an  interim roster to provide insight on accessing and applying  specialized technical advice. He endorsed adding adaptation  technologies to the list of potential topics on which  experts were sought. CANADA, JAPAN, AUSTRALIA, AOSIS and  others supported the development of a roster of experts.  KIRIBATI called for the inclusion of an expert on fisheries.  The US recommended the issue be deferred until SBSTA  clarifies the tasks envisioned for experts so they do not  duplicate the work of other fora. The G-77/CHINA noted the  need to include experts from developing countries and sought  full transparency. He said experts should be strictly  technical rather than political. The Chair later reported  that while the issue was to be resolved in collaboration  with the SBI, the SBI would manage the remaining progress,  given the technical subject matter. No formal decision was  taken on this issue. It will be considered at future SBSTA  sessions.

### RESEARCH AND SYSTEMATIC OBSERVATIONS

Regarding research and  systematic observations, ARGENTINA, on behalf of the  Valdivia Group, sought expanded research on natural climate  variability in the region and on oceanic effects. IRAN and  BURKINA FASO called for enhanced data collection at regional  and subregional levels. CANADA, the RUSSIAN FEDERATION, the  US and AUSTRALIA endorsed the continuation of climate change  research conducted by IGOs and national governments.  UNESCO/IOC stated its intent to increase research regarding  the oceans' effects on climate change. The WMO expressed  willingness to entertain specific research requests and  cooperate with SBSTA in capacity building. The ICAO sought  expanded research concerning the impact of aircraft  emissions. No formal decision was taken on this issue. It  will be considered at future SBSTA sessions.

### COOPERATION WITH THE IPCC

Upon considering SBSTA's  cooperation with the IPCC, many delegations, including the  EU, AUSTRALIA, the US, CANADA and MYANMAR, endorsed the  IPCC's efforts. The RUSSIAN FEDERATION sought clarification  of SBSTA's relationship to the IPCC concerning the use of  its data. No formal decision was taken on this issue. It  will be considered at future SBSTA sessions.

### PROGRAMME OF WORK

SBSTA was able to adopt its long-term  programme of work, which provides the tentative schedule for  forthcoming SBSTA sessions. Issues such as scientific  assessments, national communications, AIJ and NGO  consultative mechanisms will be considered.

Concerning the report of the third session, the Chair stated  that he would present general oral comments on unresolved  issues to the closing Plenary. Written comments may be  included in the reports and recommendations submitted  jointly by SBSTA and SBI. SBSTA concluded its third session  on 16 July 1996, amid some feelings of frustration regarding  the group's inability to reach agreement on the issue of the  SAR.

## SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION

During the third session of the SBI, which was chaired by  Mohamed Ould El Ghaouth (Mauritania), little discussion of  difficult issues took place during open sessions. Delegates  noted their objections to several draft decisions, which  were referred immediately to contact groups by the Chair.  Differences were ironed out in closed sessions by Parties,  and were considered for adoption by the open SBI session  only after consensus had been reached. Contact group issues  included: technology transfer; the operating budget of the  Secretariat; legal issues concerning relocation of the  Secretariat to Bonn and the possibility of setting up a  liaison office with the Secretariat at UN Headquarters in  New York; guidance to the GEF Council; the Annex to the  Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the GEF Council  and the COP; and national communications from non-Annex I  Parties. The contact groups were able to resolve all  outstanding issues with the exception of the Annex to the  MOU. The SBI's decisions, as well as an explanation of the  unresolved MOU issue, are contained in the report of SBI-3  (FCCC/SBI/1996/L.3).

### COMMUNICATIONS FROM NON-ANNEX I PARTIES

The decision on  communications from non-Annex I Parties (FCCC/CP/1996/L.12)  was drafted with input from the SBSTA. During the SBI  regular session, several developing country delegations  objected to language in the Secretariat's draft that called  on non-Annex I countries to include information on GHG  mitigation measures in their national communications. This  matter was resolved in a contact group.

The decision adopted by the Plenary requests the Secretariat  to facilitate assistance to non-Annex I Parties in the  preparation of their first national communications through  regional workshops and other fora. The decision incorporates  an annex with guidelines for preparation of initial  communications, and determines that national and regional  development priorities should be taken into account by the  COP in considering initial communications. Parties wishing  to volunteer more information are to use national reporting  guidelines for Annex I Parties.

Guidelines for communications from non-Annex I Parties  require the following: a national inventory of anthropogenic  emissions by sources and removals by sinks of all GHGs; a  general description of steps to implement the FCCC; and  other information relevant to calculation of global emission  trends.

### GUIDANCE TO THE GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY

During the SBI  regular session, several developing country delegations  objected to conditionalities placed on GEF project approvals  by the GEF Council, stating that all guidelines on GEF  projects should come from the COP, not the GEF Council.  Among the GEF Council guidelines that delegates objected to  were requirements that projects be cost-effective and not  duplicative. Delegates also called for accelerating the  project approval process. This matter was resolved in a  contact group that discussed COP guidance to the GEF  Council.

The decision adopted by the Plenary (FCCC/CP/1996/L.9) calls  on the GEF, as the interim operating financial mechanism of  the FCCC, to: implement enabling activities that facilitate  capacity building in data collection, consistent with policy  guidance, programme priorities and eligibility criteria  provided by the COP; provide agreed full incremental costs  to implement measures covered by Article 4.1 (commitments  under common but differentiated responsibility) in  accordance with Article 4.3 (new and additional resources),  and to enhance transparency and flexibility; finance full  incremental costs only upon request of the interested Party;  expedite approval of full agreed costs  for preparation of  national communications by non-Annex I Parties; and report  on these activities at COP-3.

### ANNEX TO THE MOU BETWEEN THE COP AND THE GEF COUNCIL

During  the SBI regular session, several developing country  delegations objected to language in the Secretariat's draft  that contained text of a draft Annex already approved by the  GEF Council. The purpose of the Annex is to define funding  requirements for implementation of the FCCC, to be used by  the GEF Council during GEF replenishment negotiations.  Developing country Parties called for specific reference to  funding full agreed costs of national communications, as  well as full incremental costs of other measures in support  of FCCC implementation. This matter was referred to a  contact group.

By the Closing Plenary, Parties had still not reached  consensus on this issue. The draft Annex to the MOU  (FCCC/CP/1996/9) had already been approved by the GEF  Council. It asks the COP to define the funding requirements  from the GEF for implementation of the FCCC as follows:  taking into account information communicated under Article  12 (national communications); national programmes formulated  under Article 4.1(b) (mitigation measures); information  communicated to the COP from the GEF regarding project  proposals submitted; and other sources of funding available  for implementation.

The G-77/CHINA tabled its own draft decision that asks the  COP to define funding requirements from the GEF for  implementation of the FCCC as follows: agreed full costs  incurred by developing country Parties to prepare national  communications; agreed incremental costs to implement  measures under Article 4.1 (commitments under common but  differentiated responsibility); and costs of adaptation to  the adverse effects of climate change. The draft also states  that: GEF replenishment will be based on the COP's  assessment; the GEF shall clearly indicate how funds  designated as 'new and additional' are so defined; and the  COP shall review necessary funding for implementation at  each replenishment of the financial mechanism.The Parties  will consider this draft, along with the one approved by the  GEF Council, as well as other proposals if submitted, at the  fourth meeting of the SBI in December 1996.

### SECRETARIAT ACTIVITIES RELATING TO FINANCIAL AND TECHNICAL  SUPPORT TO PARTIES

The decision (FCCC/CP/1996/L.5) takes  note of the technical and financial support provided by the  Secretariat to developing country Parties, including a World  Wide Web site on national implementation measures. It urges  all Parties to  contribute to the trust fund for  supplementary activities and requests the Secretariat to  prepare a progress report on these activities.

### DEVELOPMENT AND TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGIES

During the SBI  regular session, several developing country delegations  called for language in the draft decision to urge developed  countries to accelerate the pace of technology transfer.  This matter was resolved in a contact group.

The decision adopted by the Plenary (FCCC/CP/1996/L.16)  expresses concern over the slow pace of technology transfer,  and requests the Secretariat to: enhance progress reports on  transfer of environmentally sound technologies (ESTs) based  on information in national communications; give high  priority to development of a survey of initial technology  needs of non-Annex I Parties, to be presented at SBSTA-4;  initiate action, taking account of the Climate Technology  Initiative of the OECD to develop databases on ESTs; and  prepare reports on adaptation technology and on know-how  conducive to mitigating and adapting to climate change and  to prepare a roster of experts.

The decision also urges Parties to: include information on  technology transfer in their national communications and  improve the enabling environment for technology transfer.

### ACTIVITIES IMPLEMENTED JOINTLY

The decision  (FCCC/CP/1996/L.7), which takes note of the Secretariat's  progress report on AIJ (FCCC/CP/1996/14 and Add.1), decides  to continue the pilot phase, invites Parties to report on  their activities and requests the Secretariat to support the  work on AIJ as agreed by the SBI and SBSTA. The progress  report on AIJ includes submissions by Australia, Canada,  Germany, the Netherlands (including a joint report with  Hungary), Norway (including a joint report with Mexico), and  the US, for a total of 32 ongoing or planned projects. The  projects are classified as follows: five in energy  efficiency; twelve in renewable energy; five in fuel  switching; five in forest preservation, restoration or  reforestation; four in afforestation; and one in fugitive  gas capture.

### ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PERMANENT SECRETARIAT

Decisions  FCCC/CP/1996/L.2 and L.14 take note of the Convention  Secretariat's impending move to Bonn and requests Parties to  communicate to the Secretariat their designation of focal  points, to enable the Secretariat to explore the cost and  need to establish liaison arrangements in New York and  Geneva.

### INCOME AND BUDGET PERFORMANCE FOR 1997

Decisions  FCCC/CP/1996/L.3 and L.8 note that the net total requirement  for the 1996-1997 core budget fund is currently estimated as  US$13,573,500 and that the level of the working capital  reserve will remain at 8.3% of estimated expenditure for  1997. The Secretariat is called on to consider options for  reducing the cost of documentation.

### PROGRAMME OF WORK, 1996-1997

The decision  (FCCC/CP/1996/L.4) takes note of the 1996-1997 programme of  work developed by the SBI (FCCC/SBI/1996/11). The programme  of work covers the following elements: communications from  Annex I as well as non-Annex I Parties; allocation and  control of emissions from international bunker fuels;  matters relating to the financial mechanism; transfer of  technology; activities implemented jointly under the pilot  phase; technical and financial support by the Secretariat;  and institutional and budgetary matters.

## AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE

The fourth session of the AGBM considered strengthening the  commitments in Article 4.2 (a) (policies and measures) and  (b) (QELROS within specified time frames); implementation of  Article 4.1 (national reports); the possible features of a  protocol or other legal instrument; and the Berlin Mandate  process. In his draft report of AGBM-4 (FCCC/AGBM/1996/L.2),  Rapporteur Dan Reifsnyder (US) reported that the AGBM Chair  Raúl Estrada- Oyuela (Argentina) recalled, at the opening  meeting on 11 July, that Parties are now halfway through the  preparation period a protocol or other legal instrument. The  Chair also expressed concern at the lack of progress made by  some Annex I Parties in reducing GHG emissions and at the  perception of some Parties that commitments do not extend  beyond 2000. To facilitate exchange, the group convened  three round tables.

### ROUND TABLE ON POLICIES AND MEASURES

This round table was  chaired by Suphavit Piamphongsant (Thailand). There was  broad agreement that Parties should have considerable  flexibility in deciding policies and measures based on  starting points and national circumstances, but disagreement  on whether national action is adequate in all cases and  whether some measures need to be mandated internationally.  Advocates of the former suggested a menu approach. Others  argued for a limited number of required or harmonized  policies and measures because some desirable elements would  not be implemented unilaterally for competitive reasons.

Criteria for selecting policies and measures would include  their potential to limit GHG emissions, economic cost,  political feasibility and the need for common action.  Priority areas include 'no regrets' strategies, renewable  energy, product standards, industrial sectors with high  energy demand, CFCs, the international air and marine  transport sector, economic/fiscal instruments, reductions in  subsidies to, for example, coal, and financing mechanisms  for economies in transition. Also discussed were the  possibility of developing countries acceding voluntarily to  commitments, linkage of policies and measures and QELROs,  and the need to amend policies and measures in light of new  information and transparency.

### ROUND TABLE ON POSSIBLE IMPACTS ON DEVELOPING COUNTRY  PARTIES OF NEW COMMITMENTS TO BE NEGOTIATED BY ANNEX I  PARTIES

This round table was chaired by Kilaparti  Ramakrishna of the Woods Hole Research Center (US). On the  impact of possible new Annex I commitments, participants  agreed that developing countries would be affected by action  taken by Annex I Parties to address climate change. The  extent of the impact and their positive and/or negative  nature was the subject of disagreement. Cited studies  indicate loss of export revenue, especially for fossil fuel  exporters, increased barriers to trade, and spill-over  effects. Negative effects in Annex I countries may have an  impact on aid flows. Potential positive benefits include  technical innovation and transfers, and renewed growth based  on low-emission activities. A key theme was the uncertainty  concerning economic and social impacts of mitigation  policies.

On the question of weighing the economic and social impacts  of Annex I Parties' action against the economic, social and  environmental costs of inaction, participants drew attention  to non-economic costs including ecosystem degradation.  Noting the special vulnerability of developing countries to  climate change, speakers said the short-term negative costs  resulting from Annex I actions would be dwarfed by the  consequences of inaction. Doing nothing is not an option.

On the question of where Parties go from here, there was  agreement on the need to achieve equitable and appropriately  financed burden sharing through global cooperation in  conformity with the FCCC. Noting the flexibility enjoyed by  Annex I Parties, participants advocated well-designed, cost- effective responses that stimulate technological innovation  and improved efficiency. No regrets and low-cost strategies  were emphasized along with AIJ. Further study and a  compensation fund were proposed.

### ROUND TABLE ON QUANTIFIED EMISSION LIMITATION AND REDUCTION  OBJECTIVES

This informal round table on quantified emission  limitation and reduction objectives (QELROs) was chaired by  Dan Reifsnyder (US). Panelists noted the inherent  difficulties on the question of level or levels of emissions  limitation and reduction. Some highlighted that even the  best efforts of Annex I Parties would not lead to a  stabilization of global emissions. Ultimately the  determination of QELROs would be politically based.

On whether or not eventual quantified objectives should be  legally binding, a number argued that legally binding  commitments would increase credibility and send appropriate  signals to the market place where they are required for  competitiveness reasons. Binding commitments could coexist  with flexibility. Others favored an indicative target.  Monitoring of compliance and enforcement was also  considered.

On whether commitments should be multi-Party obligations,  single Party, or a combination, panelists generally agreed  on a preference for the single Party option, even if an  overall objective for Annex I Parties is set. On appropriate  end year(s), panelists concentrated on calls for early  action. Diverse views were offered on the question of  differentiated commitments which, it was said, had the  potential to achieve a more equitable and efficient outcome  than a flat rate approach. Proposals for differentiation  included: energy efficiency per unit of GDP; the cost of GDP  foregone; marginal costs of abatement; and a flat rate  reduction effort combined with full trading among Annex I  Parties.

### AGBM-4

The Chair drew attention to the apparent preference  among the Annex I Parties for a draft protocol, but noted  that the continuing divergence of views on the majority  required for its adoption meant that an amendment remained  an option. During discussion on policies and measures and  QELROS, the AGBM debate centered on the pros and cons of  mandatory approaches and their market-based alternatives.  The US argued that no single set of policies and measures  could apply to all countries given their diverging  circumstances. The EU, calling for the widest possible  measures and significant emission reductions, put forward  three categories of policies and measures, ranging from  required elements to a broad list from which Parties might  choose.

A number of non-Annex I Parties expressed concern about  existing Annex I Party implementation, while some countries  suffered the effects of inaction. BANGLADESH reminded  developed countries about their obligations. AUSTRALIA  cautioned that the potential to limit GHG emissions without  seriously undermining economic growth is limited and ruled  out flat emissions as neither environmentally nor cost  effective. At the final meeting of AGBM-4, SAUDI ARABIA  complained about a lack of transparency in discussion  regarding Annex I countries and called for an international  approach to revenue recycling, mirroring the approach to  burden sharing. KUWAIT stressed an assessment of policies  and measures and QELROs based on their economic impact on  developing countries. The EU said a draft protocol should be  negotiated at AGBM-6 based on a synthesis of proposals  received in time for AGBM-5.

In his draft conclusions, the Chair, Raúl A. Estrada-Oyuela  (Argentina), recorded points of agreement and contention.  Many delegations stressed that the form of the protocol or  other legal instrument to be adopted at COP-3 should flow  from its substance. Delegates agreed on the principle of  institutional economy to avoid a proliferation of new bodies  and mechanisms. Parties also supported a single process for  communication and review of information. The AGBM will  explore the possibility of having a single COP and  streamlined budgetary processes, with voting on a new  instrument restricted to member Parties. Many Parties  favored a protocol. The US and AUSTRALIA objected to the  inclusion of a reference already binding Parties to the  inclusion of a list of options or a 'menu' in the Chair's  draft conclusions.

There was support for both the draft protocols submitted by  the EU and AOSIS. Several reserved their position pending  decisions by the COP on rules of procedure and by the AGBM  on the substance of any new instrument. Several delegations  reaffirmed support for legally binding QELROs, ruled out a  regional mechanism, favored flexibility to reflect different  national circumstances possibly including differentiated  commitments, and emphasized a design that can accommodate  evolution via a mechanism to review provisions. A  strengthened in-depth review process and a mechanism to  accumulate experience in activities implemented jointly were  also noted.

## AD HOC GROUP ON ARTICLE 13

The Ad Hoc Group on Article 13 (AG-13) met for its second  session. Article 13 calls on the COP to consider the  establishment of a 'multilateral consultative process' (MCP)  available to Parties to resolve questions on implementation.

### PANEL PRESENTATION AND DISCUSSION

AG-13 Chair Patrick Szell  (UK) convened a Panel Presentation and Discussion on MCPs on  Tuesday, 9 July. Presentations on MCPs were made by  representatives from the International Labour Organisation  (ILO) on ILO conventions, the World Trade Organisation on  the GATT, the International Instruments Branch of the Centre  for Human Rights on compliance with human rights  conventions, the Implementation Committee of the Montreal  Protocol, and the Basel Convention on Transboundary Movement  of Hazardous Waste and Disposal, on a dispute resolution  mechanism still under development.

The Chair's Report of the meeting summarized lessons learned  from other procedures as follows: most procedures set forth  have evolved over time as a result of experience and  political expediency; internal procedures and approaches are  complementary; dispute resolution with States is usually  cooperative, intended to facilitate implementation rather  than to punish; all but the WTO MCP are multilateral  processes; a clear structure with a standing committee is  desirable; some procedures require publication of reports as  a mechanism to publicize non-compliance; and some procedures  allow for stronger compliance measures.

Following these presentations, a group of NGOs presented the  results of a study of successful MCPs, as well as responses  to a questionnaire sent out by AG-13 following its first  session to Parties, non-Parties, intergovernmental  organizations and NGOs.  The study and survey results  highlighted the following desirable elements of a MCP:  transparent and non-confrontational operation; accurate and  full reporting of data; a role for NGOs in filing  submissions on non-compliance; cooperative and non-judicial  mechanisms; provision of technical assistance to States to  facilitate compliance, including capacity building, country  studies and national compliance supervision; linkage to  other articles of the FCCC; and assurance of the sovereignty  of States over their national compliance procedures.

### SECOND SESSION OF AG-13

Following the Panel Presentation  and Discussion, the second session of AG-13 met to formally  discuss a MCP for the FCCC. Participants received a  synthesis of responses to a questionnaire on establishing a  MCP under Article 13 (FCCC/AG13/1996/1) to be considered at  the Group's December session. The EU regretted that  substantive discussions were postponed until December. He  recommended a draft decision extending the AG-13 mandate to  COP-3 and a role in examining ways to apply a MCP to a  protocol in cooperation with AGBM. The Chair recommended  draft decisions on the continuation of AG-13 and to report  results to COP-3. The Chair accepted a Saudi Arabian  proposal to replace a reference to the possible design of a  MCP with one on reporting to the COP as instructed. The  meeting adopted the draft decision.

The meeting then adopted the Chair's draft text on linkages  between AG-13 and AGBM, as amended by the US and SOUTH  AFRICA, asking the COP to decide that the AGBM may, in its  consideration of a MCP, seek such advice as may be deemed  necessary from AG-13.

Both of these draft decisions were incorporated into the  Report of AG-13 (FCCC/CP/1996/L.1) and adopted by the COP.

## HIGH LEVEL SEGMENT

COP-2 convened a Ministerial Segment from 17-19 July and  heard over 100 statements. A number of issues were common to  most statements, such as the adoption of protocol or other  legal instrument. The majority of ministers supported a  protocol, based on their endorsement of the SAR. However,  some Parties disagreed on the need, type and timing for a  protocol. The EU, and some of its member States such as  SPAIN and ITALY, strongly endorsed the SAR as the basis for  a protocol and urged decisive action. The US, in a shift  from past positions, supported the development of a legally  binding agreement to lower emissions. NEW ZEALAND stated  that a protocol must lead to equitable marginal abatement  costs across borders utilizing economic instruments. NORWAY  outlined a legally-binding commitment that recognizes  industry structures, is equitable and verifiable, and  utilizes fiscal measures.

Some Parties, primarily oil producers, raised doubts on both  the SAR and the need for urgent action. They also questioned  the FCCC process and the economic impact of measures.  NIGERIA stated that the FCCC cannot use the SAR as a basis  for action and called for compensation to African countries  for the economic consequences of a protocol. SAUDI ARABIA  highlighted the need for an equitable approach and said the  SAR should be considered by the COP in making balanced  decisions. He called for a study on the impact of adopting  policies and measures in developing countries. SYRIA said  more research was needed in order to find the appropriate  solutions. KUWAIT said there are no satisfactory answers to  uncertainties and contradictory data. He said that despite  inadequate knowledge about climate change and its impact  some countries are calling for stringent measures that will  impede international trade.

JORDAN expressed concern over the conclusions of the SAR,  particularly as it addresses developing country impacts.  VENEZUELA cautioned against putting fossil fuels on the  'accused' bench. Rather than pursuing a carbon tax, which  gives carte blanche to those with enough money to pollute,  Parties should put resources toward research and development  of technology. The RUSSIAN FEDERATION said the SAR does not  yet provide sufficient policy information. AUSTRALIA said it  would be premature to establish a particular point at which  levels of GHGs become dangerous.

Regarding current commitments, some Annex I Parties were  optimistic about their ability to reduce their emissions to  below 1990 levels. SWITZERLAND said its GHG inventory  indicates that carbon dioxide emissions may stabilize at  1990 levels by 2000. AUSTRIA stated that it has de-coupled  economic growth and an increase of emissions and will meet  the stabilization targets in the year 2000. The EU said its  members are on course to return CO2 emissions to 1990 levels  by 2000.

However, a number of developing countries, such as URUGUAY  and VIETNAM, were critical of developed country progress on  reaching 1990 levels, as well as their efforts toward  fulfilling the Berlin Mandate. MALAYSIA called it  'regrettable' that the AGBM is still exchanging views and is  unable to narrow down policies and measures. He criticized  the suggestion by some Annex I Parties that they be granted  flexibility in meeting emission targets. PERU and BRAZIL  said the credibility of Annex I Parties and the principle of  equity are in danger. COLOMBIA stated that developed  countries suffer from the 'disease of forgetting'. ZAMBIA  criticized some Annex I Parties for saying they are not  legally bound to return to 1990 GHG levels. THAILAND said  developing countries cannot be expected to undertake  commitments in the near future, given the performance of  Annex I Parties. The lack of progress by Annex I Parties on  financial backing and technology transfer was also noted by  CUBA, the PHILIPPINES, CHINA and INDIA.

Developing countries also voiced many other concerns. COSTA  RICA, on behalf of the G-77/CHINA, called for strengthening  developed country commitments through the establishment of  policies and measures and QELROs within specified time  frames. Some, including SENEGAL, focused on the GEF. GHANA  called for expeditious funding from the GEF and noted that  the GEF's actions depend on decisions of the COP and not the  reverse. KENYA criticized GEF conditionality. EL SALVADOR  said the COP should define criteria for use by the GEF.  INDONESIA and UGANDA sought assistance with capacity  building.

PORTUGAL, HUNGARY, UZBEKISTAN, GEORGIA, CENTRAL AFRICAN  REPUBLIC, EGYPT, BANGLADESH, PAKISTAN, MEXICO, BENIN,  MAURITIUS, MOROCCO and NEPAL reported on the effects of  climate change on their country and national efforts to  address the problem. BURKINA FASO, ETHIOPIA, ZAIRE, the  GAMBIA, KENYA and CHAD highlighted the difficult economic  and social context for developing countries in Africa and  noted that increasing problems of desertification and  drought indicate climate change. GUATEMALA, on behalf of the  Central America Group, and PANAMA described political  changes in their region and activities, such as recognizing  the validity of the IPCC and promoting awareness of the  human impact on the environment and consolidating national  environmental legal instruments.

Small island developing States (SIDS) pointed out the  potentially devastating consequences of climate change for  their countries and expressed support for the AOSIS  protocol. SAMOA, on behalf of AOSIS, endorsed the targets  and timetables in the AOSIS protocol, which was introduced  at COP-1. KIRIBATI stressed the coral atolls that comprise  his nation are three meters above sea level, and urged that  decisions under the FCCC be guided by the need to save the  most vulnerable ecosystems. MALDIVES described itself as a  'front line' State for climate change and the MARSHALL  ISLANDS drew attention to regional studies on sea level  rises that correlate closely with SAR findings. MICRONESIA  noted the degree to which political considerations have  hindered COP-2's discussion, and spoke against delegations  'shamelessly' blocking consideration of the SAR. NIUE said  that FCCC processes must be more flexible for small island  States.

Countries with economies in transition noted their efforts  in light of recent economic and political changes, and  called for flexibility in meeting commitments. BULGARIA said  the first national communication utilizes 1988 rather than  1990 base year data, due to a radical drop in production in  1990 following political changes. POLAND said reduced  emission levels in countries with economies in transition  helped to offset slight increases by OECD country Parties.  ROMANIA, LITHUANIA and ALBANIA said economic and social  progress must be harmonized with environmental protection by  applying the principle of sustainable development. ARMENIA  expressed caution about the adoption of a protocol including  firm base years for GHG reductions, saying countries should  not be completely prevented from developing. The CZECH  REPUBLIC said that emissions in his country have decreased  more than 20% since 1990 due to extreme economic changes,  but such a 'shock approach' is not available for all  countries. SLOVENIA stressed the importance of appropriate  technology.

Ministers also discussed policies and mechanisms needing  further consideration by COP. AUSTRALIA, the US, BHUTAN and  BOLIVIA highlighted the importance of AIJ, while DENMARK  said AIJ must not be a loophole for subsidizing energy  exports to developing countries nor a 'sorry excuse' for  postponing actions needed in developed countries. TANZANIA  noted that technology transfer and capacity building should  not be left to AIJ. INDONESIA welcomed AIJ on a voluntary  basis.

Some developed countries noted the increasing need for  cooperation to address climate change. GERMANY supported  international cooperation that recognizes Parties' 'common  but differentiated' responsibilities. JAPAN proposed  creation of a foundation for global measures. Similar  concerns were voiced by CÔTE D'IVOIRE and TUNISIA, who  called for international solidarity and encouraged  technology sharing, and GREECE, who noted the need for  international cooperation in achieving targets based on  equity principles that address social and economic impacts.  SUDAN and TURKMENISTAN encouraged international cooperation  to revive traditional means of transportation and enhanced  energy efficiency. The REPUBLIC OF KOREA said the new SAR  findings demand unity in tackling climate change.

Some delegations suggested the use of taxation schemes and  economic instruments. SWEDEN and DENMARK supported  coordinated measures in taxation, and FRANCE called for a  tax on CO2 emissions and a simple differentiation mechanism.  MOLDOVA suggested taxes on oil imports and excessive  emissions and credits for technology transfer. FINLAND said  international coordination is needed in the case of economic  instruments. The UK called for removing subsidies on the use  of fossil fuels, introducing competitiveness into energy  markets, increasing road fuel duties, improving fuel  efficiency in cars, increasing tax on aviation fuel by  removing the present exemption and improving domestic  efficiency standards.

The NETHERLANDS reported on the Climate Technology  Initiative (CTI) on behalf of the OECD and the EUROPEAN  COMMISSION. The CTI is a linked set of international  measures to promote awareness of technical responses to  climate change and identify and share expertise between  countries.

CANADA highlighted the participation of industry and NGOs in  an open and transparent process. ICELAND underlined the need  for additional efforts to fulfill the Berlin Mandate.  BELGIUM emphasized the link between FCCC negotiations and  those at the CSD and said the Special Session of the General  Assembly will be the 'moment of truth.' SRI LANKA stressed  the need for sustained economic growth and alleviation of  poverty when reviewing the implementation of the Convention.  BOTSWANA stated that national communications are not useful  in the long run if the data is not comparable. The  DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA called for GHG  mitigation guidelines that are simple and equitable, taking  different social and economic situations into account.  ZIMBABWE said emerging interest groups had slowed  negotiations and appealed to Parties to conclude issues  blocking implementation. ARGENTINA called for a substantive  and binding Ministerial Declaration to support the SAR, one  based on consensus that is a 'convergence of opinion,' not  necessarily unanimity.

### MINISTERIAL ROUNDTABLE

On Wednesday afternoon, 17 July  1996, Ruth Dreifuss, Head of the Federal Department of the  Interior (Switzerland), chaired a closed Ministerial Round  Table on political issues emerging from the agenda, with  Ministers, Heads of Delegations and Executive Directors of  international organizations. She later gave a report on the  Round Table to the Plenary.

On new scientific findings in the IPCC Second Assessment  Report and its consequences for political action, the  Ministerial Round Table recognized the outstanding work of  the IPCC scientists and agreed that the SAR provides  important scientific elements to be considered in decision- making. Many ministers noted with concern the SAR's  conclusion that there is a discernible human influence on  the global climate. Taking into account the precautionary  principle, they underlined the need for urgent action at the  widest possible level. A large majority endorsed the SAR as  the basis for political action. The Round Table agreed that  Parties should only ask the IPCC to respond to scientific  questions.

Ministers also stressed the adverse social and economic  impacts of climate change, particularly the impact on the  agricultural sector. Representatives of small island  developing States and African countries highlighted their  particular vulnerability and the lack of technical and  financial resources for prevention and adaptation, and  called on the GEF to play an enabling role. On efforts  needed to advance existing FCCC commitments, participants  reiterated that developed countries must take the lead and  strengthen efforts to stabilize GHG emissions at 1990 levels  by 2000. The urgent need for collaboration between different  ministries was highlighted.

Technology and financial transfers to developing countries  were also underlined. Oil exporting countries voiced concern  about the adverse economic impacts of Annex I Party  commitments and called for re-evaluation and development of  new uses for petroleum products. On strengthening Annex I  Party commitments within the context of the Berlin Mandate,  the ministers confirmed their willingness to accelerate  negotiations so as to have a protocol or other legal  instrument adopted at COP-3. They signaled the need to start  negotiating text at AGBM-5.

### GENEVA DECLARATION

On Thursday morning, the President  introduced an 'advance text' of a Ministerial Declaration,  which was produced by a drafting group. In the afternoon, he  returned to the issue of the Declaration, stating that it  had emerged from consultations with a representative group  of 'Friends of the Chair' overseen by Canada. He asked the  COP to take note of the Declaration and his introductory  remarks, which will be included in his Report, and to annex  the Declaration to the report of the Conference. This was  accepted, but a number of delegates took the floor to  express their concerns.

AUSTRALIA had difficulty with the aspect of the text  committing Parties to legally binding targets in a final  legal instrument without the nature and context being clear,  and could not  associate itself with the language on  targets. The US 'wholeheartedly' endorsed the Declaration  and said the one point not specified was that the negotiated  outcome must ensure maximum national flexibility for all  Parties to implement their medium-term legally binding  commitments. There is also a need to work toward a longer  term concentration goal, and AIJ on a global basis and  international emissions trading must be part of any future  regime. NEW ZEALAND had difficulty with a reference  concerning targets in the Declaration and his country's  support must be qualified by the view that it can only be  advanced on the basis of a least cost approach.

SAUDI ARABIA, on behalf of VENEZUELA, IRAN, KUWAIT,  UAE,  SYRIA, QATAR, JORDAN, the RUSSIAN FEDERATION, NIGERIA, OMAN,  BAHRAIN, SUDAN and YEMEN, reported a lack of transparency  throughout the Conference. He read a formal objection from  this group of Parties to the adoption, approval or  acceptance of the draft Ministerial Declaration due to the:  lack of opportunity for the COP to discuss the draft;  failure of the draft to reflect the views of many Parties as  stated at COP-2, with the result that the draft reflects  only some views that exist among the Parties; non-objective  characterization and selective reference to some of the  information in the SAR, resulting in a draft that is biased  and misleading; and failure to adhere to the customary  procedures of UN bodies and the absence of adoption of rules  of procedure for the COP.

The EU fully and unequivocally supported the Ministerial  Declaration and GHANA said the FCCC is 'a matter of life and  death,' and noted the need for the Declaration.

This high-level statement was christened the 'Geneva  Declaration' during the Closing Plenary on Friday, 19 July.  When the President proposed that COP-2 'take note' of the  Declaration and that it be annexed to the Report of the  Session (FCCC/CP/1996/L.10), SAUDI ARABIA asked to have his  statement annexed to the report as well.

The Geneva Declaration notes that the ministerial meeting is  a demonstration of the intention to take an active and  constructive role in addressing climate change. It states  that the ministers and other heads of delegations:recall Article 2 (objective of the FCCC) as well as the  principles of equity, common but differentiated  responsibility, the respective capabilities of Parties, the  precautionary principle, and development priorities; recognize and endorse the SAR of the IPCC, noting in  particular its findings that the balance of evidence  suggests a discernible human influence on climate and that  significant reductions in net GHG emissions are possible and  feasible; believe that the findings of the SAR indicate dangerous  interference with the climate system; recognize the need for continuing IPCC studies to minimize  uncertainty; and reaffirm existing commitments to the FCCC, especially of  Annex I Parties.

The document also states that the ministers and heads of  delegations:take note that Annex I Parties are fulfilling their  commitments to mitigate climate change through national  policies and measures and that these Parties need to make  additional commitments to return GHG emissions to 1990  levels by 2000; acknowledge the work of the AGBM and call on all Parties to  submit proposals for substantive negotiations at AGBM-5; instruct their representatives to accelerate negotiations on  a legally-binding protocol or other legal instrument to be  completed by COP-3; welcome the efforts of developing country Parties to  implement the FCCC and call on the GEF to provide  expeditious and timely support; recognize the continuing advancement of existing commitments  by developing country Parties; and thank the Swiss government for its contribution to COP-2 and  look forward to COP-3 in Kyoto, Japan.

## CLOSING PLENARY

Japan's Minister of State and Director General of the  Environment Agency, Sukio Iwadare, thanked the COP for its  decision to take up his country's offer to host and cover  the costs of COP-3 in Kyoto, Japan, from 1-12 December 1997.  He said much remains to be done if a protocol or other legal  instrument is to be adopted at COP-3. The meeting will be a  significant step forward to the construction of an economy  and society that place less of a burden on the environment.  His delegation supported agreement on an effective legal  instrument at COP-3.

### REPORTS FROM THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES

SBSTA Chair Tibor Farago  (Hungary) reported on the SBSTA's discussion on the IPCC  SAR. He said an unfinished draft decision with brackets  (FCCC/CP/1996/L.11) remained for the COP to resolve. The  draft decision provides advice on how the SAR can be used  for implementation. He suggested that bracketed texts with  alternative references to the SAR be deleted. He also  reported on decisions adopted in conjunction with the SBI on  Communications from Annex I Parties (FCCC/CP/1996/L.13 and  Add. 1) and on Communications from non-Annex I Parties  (FCCC/CP/1996/L.12). The SBI and the SBSTA also agreed on a  decision on activities implemented jointly  (FCCC/CP/1996/L.7). Progress was made on a roster of experts  and technical panels and the SBSTA will also reconsider NGO  consultation mechanisms and cooperation with the IPCC.

SBI Chair Mohammad Ould El Ghaouth (Mauritania) also  referred to the three draft decisions agreed with the SBSTA.  He said the process has not been easy and it is the  responsibility of the COP to define changes and directions  to be taken in future to secure the support of the largest  number of Parties. The starting point for open and  purposeful examination in future will be based on the view  that a certain body of experience is necessary. This will  make a non-confrontational approach possible.

AGBM Chair Raúl A. Estrada-Oyuela (Argentina), reported that  he will present a summary of all proposals received by 15  October at AGBM-5 in December 1996. It is hoped that this  contribution will provide a framework tool for discussion  and be a major step forward in developing a negotiating  text. To date, much attention has been given to analysis and  assessment exercises. The debate has been difficult,  however, the round tables produced satisfactory results. No  great progress was made on policies and measures. With  regard to QELROs, it was necessary to reconcile fairly  divergent views. Participants focused on differentiation of  commitments and the likely impact on developing countries of  new Annex I undertakings. Implementation of Article 4.1  (common but differentiated responsibilities) of the FCCC by  non-Annex I Parties was also considered.

He stated that the AGBM is no more than the sum of the will  of the governments represented. Many would have preferred to  have made greater progress. The Geneva Declaration will be  particularly significant for future AGBM activities.  Detailed consideration will be given to the legally binding  nature of the targets and objectives.

AG-13 Chair Patrick Szell (UK) said the first session of  this Group dealt with a questionnaire sent to Parties, IGOs  and NGOs, inviting views on the definition of a multilateral  consultative process and views on the way in which such a  process should relate to other articles.

There was also a call for a panel presentation on the  experiences of other bodies with MCPs. This workshop took  place during COP-2, with nine invited speakers addressing  compliance in international environmental agreements. One of  the main messages was that other organizations use a variety  of mechanisms ranging from the provision of advice or  assistance through to full complaint or supervisory regimes.  A decision will be needed on which approach will be most  appropriate for Article 13 or whether either or a  combination will be appropriate.

A half-day meeting of AG-13 took place after the workshop.  It received a report on the workshop and a formal  presentation of a synthesis document containing responses to  the questionnaire. Two draft decisions were adopted, one on  the Group's continued existence into 1996-1997, and a second  to enable the AGBM, should it be considered desirable, to  seek AG-13 advice on a multilateral consultative process  (FCCC/CP/1996/L.1). It may not be possible to complete the  Group's work for COP-3, but the work of AG-13 should be on  the road to completion by December 1997.

### ADOPTION OF DRAFT DECISIONS

The Plenary then considered  adoption of the draft decisions negotiated by the subsidiary  bodies. Under reports of other subsidiary bodies (Agenda  Item 7), the following documents were adopted without  amendment: Report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation  (FCCC/CP/1996/L.4 and FCCC/CP/1996/L.5) and Report of the Ad  Hoc Group on Article 13 (FCCC/CP/1996/L.1). Under review of  the implementation of the FCCC and of COP-1 decisions  (Agenda Item 5), the following documents were adopted  without amendment: Development and transfer of technologies  (FCCC/CP/1996/L.16) and Activities implemented jointly,  annual review of the pilot phase (FCCC/CP/1996/L.7).

Two alternate paragraphs in brackets, in the Report of the  Subsidiary Body on Scientific and Technological Advice  (FCCC/CP/1996/L.11), containing SBSTA's interpretation of  the Second Assessment Report of the IPCC, were deleted at  the suggestion of the President. The amended document,  lacking an interpretation of the SAR, was adopted. The  MARSHALL ISLANDS pointed out that a majority of delegations  supported the stronger interpretation of the SAR. He stated  that he would reluctantly go along with the decision, which  he called a 'victory for the minority.' The EU called the  SAR the most authoritative assessment on the science of  climate change, and strongly endorsed it as the basis for  urgent action to negotiate a protocol or other legal  instrument. SAUDI ARABIA disagreed with this assessment.

No consensus was reached on a number of issues under this  agenda item. Under communications to the GEF (Agenda Item  5(a)), the President asked for submissions from Parties for  consideration at future meetings. Under intensifying efforts  under the Berlin Mandate process, the President asked for  submissions from Parties to provide an initial negotiated  text at AGBM-5.

Under decisions to promote effective implementation (Agenda  Item 6), the following documents were adopted without  amendment: Communications from Annex I Parties  (FCCC/CP/1996/L.13 and Add.1); Communications from non-Annex  I Parties (FCCC/CP/1996/L.12); and Guidance to the GEF  (FCCC/CP/1996/L.9). The G-77/CHINA emphasized that this is  the only document accepted by the COP on guidance to the  GEF. The President then stated that no consensus had been  reached on the Annex to the Memorandum of Understanding  between the COP and the GEF Council. He noted that two  documents would be submitted to SBI-4 for further  consideration, the draft MOU already adopted by the GEF  Council (FCCC/CP/1996/9), and an alternate text submitted by  the G-77/CHINA. He invited Parties to submit additional  comments before then. This course of action was accepted by  the Plenary.

Under administrative and financial matters (Agenda Item 8),  the following documents were adopted without amendment:  Establishment of the permanent Secretariat (FCCC/CP/1996/L.2  and FCCC/CP/1996/L.14) and Income and budget performance and  resource deployment for 1997 (FCCC/CP/1996/L.3 and  FCCC/CP/1996/L.8).

The Plenary then considered the schedule of meetings and the  election of officers other than the President. Raúl A.  Estrada-Oyuela (Argentina), who chaired a contact group on  the issue, reported that there was no consensus among the  regional groups. Consultations will continue before the  subsidiary body meetings in December 1996.

Parties then considered the Ministerial Declaration. The  President recalled the discussions during the Ministerial  Segment, where delegates agreed to note the decision and  attach it to the report of the meeting. He allowed some  delegates to make statements for the record. VENEZUELA  stated that it did not support the draft Declaration, which  is neither balanced nor objective. He said there are  scientific doubts and called for a dialogue on consensus.  The RUSSIAN FEDERATION asked that its prepared statement be  reflected in the report of the session, and called for a  notation that a group of Parties raised objection to the  text of the Ministerial Declaration. KUWAIT proposed  inserting a footnote stating that several countries have  objected. AOSIS accepted the Declaration as a statement of  determination to give force and direction to the Berlin  Mandate. ARGENTINA objected that many of the delegates who  spoke were not ministers. He said the COP was aware that  some delegations have disassociated themselves from the  Declaration. GERMANY proposed referring to the declaration  as the 'Geneva Declaration.' The Plenary then considered the Draft Report of the  Conference of the Parties on its Second Session  (FCCC/CP/1996/L.10). SAUDI ARABIA and the RUSSIAN FEDERATION  proposed that their statements on the Ministerial  Declaration be annexed to the report in their entirety. The  section on the rules of procedure notes that the President  proposed that consideration of the item be postponed to give  time for further consultations. It also notes that the draft  rules of procedure should continue to be applied, with the  exception of Rule 42 (voting). SAUDI ARABIA also requested  that its objection to the rules of procedure be noted.  JAMAICA stressed the need for  transparency in the  consultative process on the rules of procedure.

### CLOSING STATEMENTS

The Plenary then heard closing  statements. COSTA RICA, on behalf of the G-77/CHINA,  expressed concern with the procedure used for adoption of  the Geneva Declaration, calling for transparent decision  making.

EL SALVADOR, on behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean  Group, called it 'deplorable' that COP-2 had not been able  to elect officers 'in a proper manner,' and requested the  Secretariat to continue to strengthen the 'consultation  machinery.' The Executive Secretary of the FCCC, Michael Zammit Cutajar,  noted that the political content of COP-2 had exceeded his  expectations, calling the Geneva Declaration the most  important and visible outcome. He also singled out the  decision on non-Annex I communications, calling it a further  step towards 'universality.' He praised the weight given to  the implementation of commitments. He also stated that the  FCCC has 'some way to go' to encourage technology transfer,  and he regretted it was not possible to agree on  implementation of Article 6 (education and public  awareness). He commended the Swiss government for organizing  the 'cybercafe', a public link to the World Wide Web set up  at COP-2 as a step toward reducing the volume of paper used  to provide information.

COP-2 President Chen Chimutengwende (Zimbabwe) described his  election as the 'easiest thing' at this Conference, adding  that 'almost everything after that was marked with no.'' He  noted that it had been impossible to reach a consensus on  the rules of procedure, highlighting the 'dilemma' of  'trying to run everything without rules.' Although he  emphasized the stress involved in carrying out his duties,  Chimutengwende also expressed satisfaction with the outcome  of the conference. COP-2 concluded at 4:30 pm on 19 July  1996.

# A BRIEF ANALYSIS OF COP-2

The Second Conference of the Parties (COP-2) to the  Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC) sent out a  number of important political signals as the COP continues  toward the goal of strengthening the commitments on the part  of industrialized countries to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG)  emissions beyond the year 2000. COP-2, marking the mid-point  in the schedule for the fulfillment of the Berlin Mandate,  'noted' a strong Ministerial Declaration confirming the  findings of the IPCC Second Assessment Report (SAR) and  calling for 'legally binding' commitments. COP-2 also  convened a Ministerial Round Table, which endorsed the  points in the Declaration. In a dramatic change of position,  the US announced support for a legally binding protocol or  other legal instrument.

Nonetheless, many longstanding disagreements on fundamental  issues appeared to solidify, both in the subsidiary bodies  and the COP. For example, delegates could not agree on  references to the SAR or on the election of officers,  leaving the COP to again 'apply' rather than 'adopt' the  rules of procedure. Also, the US support for a protocol was  linked to a preference for a tradeable permit system,  raising many new complexities for delegations. These signals  - both positive and negative - indicate that many obstacles  await future negotiations.

### AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE (AGBM)

AGBM-4 completed  its in-depth analyses of the likely elements of a protocol  or other legal instrument, and appeared ready to move  forward to the preparation of a negotiating text at its next  session in December. Most of the discussions dealt with  approaches to policies and measures, Quantified Emission  Limitation and Reduction Objectives (QELROs), and an  assessment of the likely impact of new commitments for Annex  I Parties on developing countries.

While many interpret the Geneva Declaration as a signal that  sufficient consensus has formed to accelerate the AGBM  process, the protocol status of a new agreement is by no  means finalized. If a framework for negotiations has begun  to be defined, so too have the political hurdles. These will  include: striking a balance between an agreed set or menu of  policies and measures; satisfying developing and oil  exporting countries' concerns that sufficient safeguards  will be taken to offset economic losses likely to be  incurred as a result of new Annex I Party commitments;  striking a balance between a legally binding agreement and  specificity of targets; the strength and credibility of the  multilateral consultative process (MCP) called for in  Article 13; and embedding the principle of equity and burden  sharing in any new agreement.

### SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION

The SBI and the COP were  unable to agree on the Annex to the Memorandum of  Understanding (MOU) between the COP and the GEF Council. The  purpose of this Annex, previously approved by the GEF  Council, is to provide guidance on determining the financial  requirements for implementation of the FCCC to be used by  the GEF during the next round of replenishment negotiations.

While at first sight the disagreement over the MOU seems  little more than another institutional rivalry between two  international bodies, the fracture runs far deeper.  Developing country delegates expressed dissatisfaction with  what they saw as an attempt by developed countries to shift  the burden of implementation from Annex I to non-Annex I  Parties, in part by manipulating the balance of projects  that will define funding requirements in the MOU Annex.  These delegates objected strongly to proposed language that  referred explicitly to funding mitigation projects by non- Annex I Parties. Delegates suspected that, by implying a  high priority for funding GHG reduction by non-Annex I  Parties, this would remove some of the pressure on Annex I  Parties to take the concrete (and likely painful) actions to  reduce their GHG emissions to below 1990 levels.

Nevertheless, it was apparent that many favored the  introduction of language on the responsibility of all  Parties to reduce GHG emissions. Ultimately, this was  reflected in a decision submitted by the SBI  (FCCC/CP/1996/L.12) on communications by non-Annex I  Parties, which will require a national inventory of  anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinks of  all GHGs as well as a general description of steps taken to  implement the FCCC. This decision elicited praise from  Executive Secretary Michael Zammit Cutajar during the  Closing Plenary.

### SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE

As  one observer noted, SBSTA-2, for the most part, proved but a  dress rehearsal for SBSTA-3, with delegates delivering many  of the same arguments in a more dramatic fashion. Agreement  on the treatment of the SAR, perhaps the most difficult  issue of COP-2, eluded the SBSTA once again. Many  delegations endorsed the SAR as the most comprehensive  assessment on climate change available, while others,  including many oil producing States and Australia, thought  it would be premature to make recommendations. A 'Friends of  the Chair' group was ultimately formed to reach a consensus,  but the group was unable to resolve anything. This issue  demonstrates that the boundaries between science and  politics are becoming increasingly difficult to maintain.

### AD HOC GROUP ON ARTICLE 13

The AG-13 offered to provide  input to the AGBM process on the design of a multilateral  consultative process (MCP). Drawing on its examination of  other international environmental agreements' compliance  procedures, it is likely to contribute to the development of  a hybrid mechanism, which might combine assistance with  reporting requirements with more stringent compliance  monitoring. AG-13 has been preparing the ground for one of  the features that will set the Berlin Mandate process apart  from the non-binding nature of the FCCC.

### MINISTERIAL DECLARATION

There were heated discussions as  Parties exchanged views on the adoption of the Ministerial  Declaration, or 'Geneva Declaration' as it was christened  during the Closing Plenary. The Declaration endorses the  IPCC's conclusions, including the finding that the continued  rise in GHG concentrations will interfere with the climate  system, and calls for legally binding objectives and  significant reductions in emissions. However, environmental  NGOs quickly noted that the Declaration does not specify  that reductions should be well below the 1990 level set in  the FCCC, fails to call for binding coordinated measures,  and does not specify an upper-bound concentration level of  GHGs. Sixteen delegations, including many oil producers,  objected to both the Declaration's content and handling, as  well as the transparency of the process that produced it.

### US SHIFT IN POSITION

The change in the US position to  support a legally binding agreement pleased many  environmental NGOs, and some predicted that the move by the  US would force many delegations, some of whom had shielded  their own opposition behind that of the US, into supporting  a legally binding agreement. However, linking a protocol to  tradeable permits led some delegates to raise both  theoretical and practical issues. AOSIS members openly noted  that this could leave the AOSIS protocol, which calls for a  20% reduction in emissions, 'dead in the water.' Some  developing countries spoke against heavy reliance on market- based schemes, arguing that markets favor the wealthy and  often solidify, rather than resolve, inequities. Many  delegates noted that a tradeable permit scheme raises a  myriad of practical questions and expressed concern about  'creative' implementation.

### RULES OF PROCEDURE

It has been suggested by one NGO that  the issue of the unresolved rules of procedure continues to  'dangle like the sword of Damocles over these negotiations.'  Without agreement on the voting procedures for a protocol  (Rule 42), observers fear that COP-3 may be forced to settle  for an amendment to the FCCC, rather than a protocol,  because delegates have already agreed on the provision for  adoption of an amendment by a three- quarters majority when  consensus cannot be reached. The AGBM Chair confirmed that  the preference of the Parties is a draft protocol, but said  the 'continuing divergence of views on the majority required  for its adoption' means that an amendment remains an option.  The Canadian delegation believes the absence of rules of  procedure means a protocol - the preferred route for  realizing the Berlin Mandate - can only be adopted by  consensus. There is no agreed procedure for the adoption of  a protocol within the FCCC, although Parties might appeal to  state practice in the UN system, whereby substantive  decisions can be taken by a two-thirds majority if consensus  cannot be reached. The COP President is continuing  intersessional consultations on this issue.

COP-2 was also unable to resolve another procedural  question, the election of officers other than the President.  Delegates at COP-1 were unable to agree on the composition  of the Bureau, with oil-producing States making a bid for  group representation. The small islands States were given a  seat on the Bureau, in light of their strong interest in the  FCCC, and oil-producers have argued for similar treatment.  Consultations were conducted by the COP-1 President over the  course of the past year, but to no avail. At COP-2, Parties  again were unable to reach agreement, despite continued  consultations conducted by AGBM Chair Raúl A. Estrada-Oyuela  (Argentina). This question, which is politically linked with  the voting question, will continue to plague negotiations  through 1997. It is unlikely to be resolved until the  outline of a protocol emerges. As a delegate from an oil- producing State repeatedly asked, 'How much longer can the  COP continue without adopting its rules of procedure?'

### INDUSTRY SUPPORT

During the first week of COP-2, an  international group of insurance companies issued a position  paper calling for 'early substantial reductions' in GHG  emissions. Deborah Vorhies, Coordinator of the Trade and  Environment Unit at UNEP, said the insurance industry  recognizes the impact of climate change on its business,  with increasing storm damage and other phenomena. Managing  risk is the business of the insurance industry and climate  change has forced some parts of the industry to recognize  that their own interests will be best served to press for a  stronger Convention. In a world of trade liberalization and  reduced governmental intervention in the market, the active  involvement of the insurance industry introduces a new  dynamic into traditional industry input into the COP.

### CONCLUSIONS

Definitive judgments on the future of the FCCC  process are difficult to make, given the mixed signals  emanating from COP-2. The challenge facing the subsidiary  bodies will be to produce a negotiating text that can  reconcile divergent interests and maintain credibility and  effectiveness. In environmental negotiations the measure of  a successful compromise is primarily a measure of its  effectiveness in bringing about the desired and sustainable  outcome. A compromise per se is not an option and not  necessarily a solution. The AGBM will test to the limits the  UN system's ability to broker a deal between those States  prepared to invest in a post-fossil fuel era and those who  stand to lose on their investment in business as usual. In  these terms COP-3's significance will be immense.

The fulfillment of the Berlin Mandate - set against the  failure of most Annex I Parties to fulfill their voluntary  commitments under the existing FCCC - will be a significant  measure of the degree to which the international community  has marshaled the political will required to build on its  commitment to sustainable development since UNCED. The  debate on the AGBM will continue to spill over into the  entire COP process, with Parties unlikely to give way on  vital issues including the effectively-engineered dispute  over the rules of procedure until the Berlin Mandate's fate  - together with the future of the global climate system -  begins to take shape.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR BEFORE COP-3

### FCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES

The FCCC subsidiary bodies will meet  from 9-18 December 1996 in Geneva. AGBM-5 is scheduled for  9-13 December 1996. The meeting will begin with Round Table  sessions and the formal agenda is expected to begin on 10  December 1996. SBSTA-4 and AG-13-3 are scheduled for 16-18  December 1996. SBI-4 has been scheduled for 10-11 December  1996 and is intended to resolve the questions on the Annex  to the Memorandum of Understanding to the GEF.

The subsidiary bodies are also scheduled to meet from 24  February - 7 March 1997 in Bonn. SBSTA-5 and SBI-4 will meet  from 24-28 February 1997. AGBM-6 and AG-13-4 will be held  from 3-7 March 1997. This schedule will be reviewed at the  December meetings.

### COP-3

COP-3 is scheduled for 1-12 December 1997 in Kyoto,  Japan. SBSTA, SBI and AG-13 will not meet during COP-3,  which will be reserved for the AGBM. For information contact  the UNFCCC Secretariat; tel: +41 22 979 9111; fax: +41 22  979 9034; e-mail: Secretariat.unfccc@unep.ch. As of 12  August 1996, the Secretariat can be contacted at: tel: +49- 228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail:  secretariat@unfccc.de. Also try the home page of the  Secretariat and UNEP's Information Unit for Conventions at  http://www.unep.ch/iuc.html.

### IPCC WORKSHOPS

A Workshop on the Preparation of Regional  Climate Projections for Impact will be held in London from  24 - 26 September 1996. It will be a meeting of modeling  communities (including emissions, climate and impacts) to  develop recommendations for regional climate projections for  the impact of assessments for use in the preparation of the  IPCC's Third Assessment Report. The IPCC will also hold  workshops on integrated assessment modeling in France  (October 1996) and Japan (March 1997). As a follow-up, a  workshop on adaptation measures will be held in Canada in  1997. In addition, three meetings of experts have been  organized on emissions inventory methodologies. These are  part of the ongoing work programme on inventory  methodologies aimed at submitting revised methodologies to  IPCC-12. For more information contact: IPCC Secretariat,  WMO, 41 Av. Giuseppe-Motta, C.P. N 2300, 1211 Geneva 2  Switzerland, tel: +41 22 730 8215/254/284, fax: +41 22 733  1270, e-mail: narasimhan.sundararaman@itu.ch.

# OTHER WORKSHOPS, CONFERENCES AND SEMINARS

## International Workshop on Greenhouse Gas Mitigation- Technologies and Measures

This workshop is co-sponsored by  the US Country Studies Program (USCSP), Deutsche  Gesellschaft fur Technische Zuzammenarbeit (GTZ) mbH, the  People's Republic of China (PRC) State Science and  Technology Commission (SSTC), the Netherlands Ministry of  Foreign Affairs, Canadian Environmental Protection Service  and others. The workshop, scheduled for 12-15 November 1996  in Beijing, will provide an international forum for the  exchange of information among representatives of countries  conducting studies on greenhouse gas mitigation technologies  and measures and other international experts. For  information contact: Ron Benioff, USCSP, 1000 Independence  Ave. SW, PO-63, Washington, DC 20585, USA, tel: +1 202 426- 0011, fax: +1 202 426-1540, e-mail: csmt@igc.apc.org; Prof.  Wu Zongxin, China Country Study Office (CCSO), Energy  Science Bldg., Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, PRC,  tel: +8610-259-4828; fax: +8610-256-4177; e-mail;  THINET@beep2,ihep.ac.cn. Also try http://www.ji.org.

International Workshop on the Preparation of Climate Change  Action Plans: This workshop, co-sponsored by the Indonesian  Ministry of the Environment and the USCSP, is scheduled for  January 1997. The workshop will provide a forum for  countries to share their experiences and preliminary results  from their planning activities, as well as training and  technical assistance to countries on the preparation of  climate change action plans. Participation is open to all  countries. For information contact: Sandy Guill, USCSP, P.O.  Box 63, 1000 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20585,  USA, tel +1 202 426-1464, fax: +1 202 426-1540 or 1551, e- mail: sguill@igc.apc.org.

International Conference on Environmental Implications of  Energy and Transport Subsidies: The Conference, scheduled  for 11-12 September 1996, is organized by the OECD, the  Italian Agency for New Technologies, Energy and the  Environment, with support from US EPA. Its objectives are  to: review studies on the environmental and economic effects  of removing subsidies and other supports to energy and  transport; and consider advantages and disadvantages of  different approaches to reforming policies and addressing  externalities in the energy and transport sectors. For  information contact: Laurie Michaelis, OECD, tel: +33 1 45  24 98 17, fax: +33 1 45 24 78 76, e-mail:  laurie.michaelis@oecd.org; GianCarlo Tosato, ENEA, tel: +39  6 3048 3958, fax: +39 6 3048 3657; e-mail  tosato@casaccia.enea.it.

Landfill Gas-to-Energy Training Workshops: The US  Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) is sponsoring  workshops for government officials and private-sector firms  to learn about the benefits of landfill gas-to-energy  recovery projects, which involve capturing methane produced  from landfills or large open dumps for use as a cost- effective energy source. The workshop for Asia and the  Pacific is scheduled for 22 August 1996 at the UN Conference  Center in Bangkok, Thailand. The workshop for Central and  Eastern Europe is scheduled for 9 September 1996 at the  Warsaw Marriott Hotel, Warsaw, Poland. For more information  contact: Tom Kerr, US EPA, tel: +1 202 233-9768; fax: +1 202  233-9569; e-mail: kerr.tom@epamail.epa.gov.

International Conference on Energy Efficiency - Technologies  and Services: This conference is scheduled for 3-5 September  1996 in Monterey, California, USA. For information contact  Ron Benioff, USCSP, 1000 Independence Ave. SW, PO-63,  Washington, DC 20585, USA, tel: +1 202 426-1637, fax: +1 202  426-1551. Also try http://www.ji.org.

# ACTIVITIES IMPLEMENTED JOINTLY

## Conference on AIJ from the Perspective of Developing  Countries

At the initiative of the Netherlands, Development  Alternatives is organizing a Conference on AIJ from the  perspective of developing countries from 8-10 January 1997  in New Delhi, India. The objectives of the Conference are:  to evaluate activities that are planned to be implemented  jointly by Annex I and non-Annex I Parties; to assess  learning experiences from current and proposed projects for  input to the COP and its subsidiary bodies; to promote the  role of the private sector and NGOs in AIJ; and, to  contribute to formulating a methodology to design a pilot  phase AIJ project and develop indicators to measure local  and global benefits. For more information contact:  K.  Chatterjee, Conference Coordinator, Development  Alternatives, B-32 Qutab Institutional Area, Hauz Khaz, New  Delhi 110016, India, tel: +91 11 66 5370 or +91 11 65 7938,  fax: +91 11 686 6031, e-mail: tara@sdalt.ernet.in.

UNEP Conference on Activities Implemented Jointly under the  UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, San Jose, Costa  Rica: This Conference, scheduled for 29-31 October 1996,  will be sponsored by UNEP in collaboration with the Earth  Council and the Government of Costa Rica. The meeting is  designed to support the work of the FCCC as it prepares the  work programme on AIJ. The working session will be organized  into a series of round table discussions to promote and open  and frank exchange of views. The meeting will emphasize the  airing of concerns of host countries and investing  organizations. For more information contact UNEP, C.P. 356,  Geneva Executive Center, 1219 Châtelaine, Geneva,  Switzerland, Tel: +41 22 979 9111; fax: +41 22 797 3464 Also  try UNEP at http://www.unep.ch.