---
title: "HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE FOURTH UNFCCC CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES, 12 NOVEMBER 1998"
id: enb1296e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1296e
date: 1998-11-12
abstract: "Delegates heard statements from ministers and other heads of  delegation in a high level segment. High level informal  consultations were held throughout the day."
---

# PLENARY

The Ministers presented overviews of domestic actions on climate  change and called for enhanced progress at the COP to ensure  ratification of the Kyoto Protocol. They expressed their  sympathy for the victims of Hurricane Mitch. FRANCE announced  the cancellation of Honduras' and Nicaragua's debt.

The US, THAILAND, PERU and TUVALU announced their signature of  the Kyoto Protocol. TRINIDAD and TOBAGO, on behalf of CARICOM  and HAITI, said BAHAMAS will sign the Protocol this week.  MICRONESIA, ITALY, CHILE, LITHUANIA, CYPRUS and the SOLOMON  ISLANDS stated that they were in the process of ratifying the  Protocol. JAPAN and SLOVENIA called for the early signing and  ratification of the Protocol. KAZAKHSTAN expressed willingness  to undertake obligations and enter into Annex B of the Kyoto  Protocol through Annex I of the FCCC.

A number of countries, including the EU, GAMBIA, JAPAN, SWEDEN,  SYRIA, CROATIA, NEW ZEALAND, RUSSIAN FEDERATION, EGYPT, NEPAL  SPAIN, GHANA and the G-77/CHINA, stressed that: active  leadership to prevent global warming must come from developed  country Parties; domestic action must provide the main means for  meeting commitments to combat climate change; and noted that  flexibility mechanisms were supplemental and their use must be  subject to strict rules of accountability and compliance. PERU  said the inaction of developed countries sends dangerous signals  to non-Annex I countries. NORWAY said developed countries must  accept even more ambitious targets in the future. Recognizing  the vulnerability of small island states, NEW ZEALAND called for  support to AOSIS.

FRANCE noted that developing country emissions are increasing  and called for timely provision of financial support and  technology transfer. With ECUADOR, FINLAND, the CARICOM states,  the GAMBIA, VENEZUELA, CHINA, ECUADOR, BENIN, TANZANIA and  UGANDA, he highlighted the need for additional financial  support, sustained transfer of information and technology,  capacity building and institutional strengthening. SUDAN  stressed technology transfer irrespective of political relations  or racial considerations. NORWAY recognized the role of industry  in technology transfer. The NETHERLANDS highlighted the need for  increased financial flows to the most vulnerable countries.

The UK, with GHANA, said scientific uncertainty should not be  used as an excuse for inaction. DENMARK called for a Buenos  Aires deal that calls upon developed countries to commit  themselves to provide additional funds to developing countries  and address their obligations under the FCCC and the Protocol.  In return, developing countries must agree to work out the  necessary national strategies to allow for a constructive review  process. AOSIS called for a clear and ambitious timetable to  elaborate the Protocol. The G-77/CHINA said their participation  in mitigating climate change depends on the effective  implementation of developed country Party commitments in the  field of technology transfer and financial resources. JAPAN and  the EU stressed the need to maintain the momentum of Kyoto, and  with FINLAND, called for the creation of a clear and efficient  work plan giving priority to developing country concerns. LATVIA  supported the EU proposal for a Buenos Aires work plan.

NEW ZEALAND, the RUSSIAN FEDERATION and the US supported the  Argentine voluntary commitment. With the US and HUNGARY,  AUSTRALIA called for meaningful participation and future  voluntary commitments appropriate to individual circumstances  and with QATAR, NORWAY, PERU and SENEGAL stressed the principle  of common but differentiated responsibilities.

AOSIS noted the inadequacy of the commitments and efforts to  implement them under the Protocol and FCCC. He said the  Argentine voluntary commitment must not be allowed to detract  from the commitments of Parties in the Protocol. CUBA, QATAR and  SAUDI ARABIA opposed any attempt to compel developing countries  to take on 'voluntary commitments.' KOREA recognized that voluntary commitments was a sensitive  issue, but there would be a need for global participation over  time. BOLIVIA stressed that substantive participation of non- Annex I Parties should be based on the principle of sovereignty  and right to self-determination and that their emissions limits  cannot constitute a precedent nor commit others to emissions  limitation targets. MALAYSIA expressed regret over the continued  discussion on voluntary commitments. ETHIOPIA said pressure for  voluntary commitments would undermine the FCCC process.

GHANA said the challenges of climate change mitigation and  adaptation present an additional burden to developing countries  and with the CARICOM states, ICELAND, AUSTRALIA, the US, SAUDI  ARABIA, NEW ZEALAND and the G-77/CHINA called for elaboration of  mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol. The CENTRAL AMERICAN STATES  stressed the importance of sinks and supported the G-77/China  proposal to prioritize the CDM and operationalize it by 1  January 2000. With CHILE, he proposed an interim phase of the  CDM. IRELAND supported the EU call for clear qualitative and  quantitative ceilings on the use of the flexibility mechanisms.  The COOK ISLANDS, MARSHALL ISLANDS, NAURU, NIUE, TUVALU, ALGERIA  and the CARICOM States expressed concern that the flexibility  mechanisms are a way of avoiding domestic responsibility.  THAILAND said the CDM should not be the sole means of technology  transfer.

SEYCHELLES expressed concern that vulnerable nations that are  insignificant on the global stage may be excluded from  programmes such as those under the flexibility mechanisms.  THAILAND supported north-south and south-south partnerships  based on equity and the principle of common but differentiated  responsibility. SPAIN called for progress on developing a  process of technology transfer and efforts to address the issue  of public awareness and education. FRANCE called for a common  approach to collective measures and said mechanisms should be  based on a reliable system of compliance that includes  sanctions. CROATIA said the flexibility mechanisms must be  equitable, i.e. open, transparent, verifiable and non- discriminatory. EGYPT emphasized the equal treatment of the  three flexibility mechanisms and suggested that part of the  proceeds from these mechanisms be mobilized to finance the  transfer of adaptation technology for developing countries.  BRAZIL underscored the CDM as a means of inducing new and mostly  private investment, and suggested that it be project based and  include all countries. CANADA described the CDM as a 'win-win- win mechanism,' i.e. win for the environment, win for  sustainable development and win for the developed countries, as  they would be able to meet the Kyoto Protocol targets. VENEZUELA  said CDM projects must ensure net contribution to sustainable  development in the host country; avoid hidden costs; and use  project-based rather than sectoral or national baselines to  avoid future imposition of targets.

ARGENTINA said emissions trading was an innovative solution to  market failure. POLAND called for final decisions on the  mechanisms at COP-5 and proposed a pilot phase for emissions  trading. KOREA opposed any limits on CDM. MEXICO stressed open  criteria and a progressive approach to CDM that could foster  immediate and simple actions without artificial limits, not  contained in the Protocol. BOTSWANA emphasized the role of the  CDM in assisting developing countries and urged progress on  elaborating this mechanism. MOROCCO said the imbalance of  projects under the AIJ pilot phase was inequitable and ZIMBABWE  recommended its extension. MALAYSIA called for the incorporation  of technology transfer and the financial mechanism into the  Protocol mechanisms.

GREECE supported agreement on clear principles, modalities,  rules and guidelines for the flexibility mechanisms including  ceilings on their use. SOUTH AFRICA supported development of a  clear programme of work, establishment of an intersessional  working group and a timeframe to ensure the Kyoto targets are  met. UKRAINE stressed establishment of a work programme for  implementation of Kyoto obligations by Annex I Parties. He said  revival in transition economies will lead to inevitable  increases in GHG emissions, but these countries will achieve  internal reductions. He opposed the 'revision' of decisions  taken at Kyoto.

Several Parties including DENMARK, VENEZUELA, POLAND, AUSTRALIA,  FRANCE, the EU and the US called for the establishment of a  coherent, effective and strong compliance system. The G-77/CHINA  called for a decision on compliance at COP-4. GERMANY suggested  a ceiling for mechanisms and, with FRANCE, supported the  inclusion of sanctions in the compliance system.

RUSSIAN FEDERATION opposed attempts to qualify its emission  reductions as 'hot air,' since they compensate for emissions  increases of other countries, and have been paid for by a  decline in living standards. BRAZIL, with KENYA, called for  further discussions on the adverse impacts of climate change.

Supported by MEXICO, BHUTAN and ICELAND, COLOMBIA called  attention to sinks under the Protocol and underscored the  elaboration of methodologies. ICELAND underscored the  proportional impact of single projects on small economies.

With BENIN and ZIMBABWE, CHINA cautioned against the COP losing  focus on the Convention. He opposed the argument that a global  problem demands a global response and rejected emission  reduction or limitation conditions. SWEDEN urged delegates to  work to increase awareness, understanding and support for change  and, with FINLAND, applauded the role of NGOs in the  environmental agenda. VENEZUELA cautioned against allowing  distractions from the main issues by discussing items not on the  COP-4 agenda. ECUADOR supported closer coordination with other  UN Conventions, particularly the CBD. NEPAL stressed regional  environmental cooperation and opposed undue limits on their  energy consumption.

KENYA called for GEF support in facilitating CDM and  implementing adaptation measures. The GAMBIA called for  membership of the Multilateral Consultative Committee and  participation in the CDM on an equitable geographical basis.  SENEGAL said the debt burden was a serious hindrance to  sustainable development and the marginalization of Africa made  equity a particular concern. INDIA stressed the distinction  between luxury and survival emissions. ZAMBIA said climate  change programmes should be linked to poverty eradication.  Recognizing that the lack of multilateral financing constitutes  a major obstacle to implementing the Convention and noting the  slow and complex process to access GEF funds, DJIBOUTI supported  the establishment of an independent financial mechanism to  finance the CDM for poor countries.

BURUNDI underscored the need for improved access to  technological information and knowledge and capacity building,  especially for African delegates participating in the climate  change process. CÔTE D'IVOIRE stated that the CDM should not be  a substitute for official development assistance or support from  the GEF. SWITZERLAND called for coordination between various  international environmental agreements, particularly the  Montreal and Kyoto Protocols. PARAGUAY highlighted its interest  in the potential of the flexibility mechanisms.

As of 9:00 pm, approximately 20 delegates were scheduled to  address the Plenary.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

Some delegates noted the US proposal to include voluntary  commitments in the draft text on flexibility mechanisms on  Tuesday changed the tone of debate, resulted in pointed attacks  from the G-77/China and hindered the spirit of compromise. Other  delegates suggested that current backroom discussions were  slowly making progress and that the term'flexibility mechanisms'  was being replaced by 'Kyoto Protocol Mechanisms.' As one  delegate asked, 'flexible for whom?' Some observers said they  expected other countries to state they would assume voluntary  commitments on the final day of the COP.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

## COP Plenary

COP Plenary is expected begin at 3:00 pm.