---
title: "INC-11 HIGHLIGHTS: WEDNESDAY, 8 FEBRUARY 1995"
id: 1204000e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/1204000e
date: 1995-02-08
abstract: ""
---

# PLENARY

The Plenary met Wednesday morning so that AOSIS could  introduce its draft protocol and Germany could introduce its  proposal for further elements of a protocol. Afterwards, the  Plenary addressed Agenda Item 4, Review of Annexes to the  Convention, and Agenda Item 5(c), Location of the Permanent  Secretariat. The Secretariat also announced that Kiribati  has deposited its instrument of ratification, bringing the  number to 120.

AGENDA ITEM 1(b)  INTRODUCTION OF THE AOSIS DRAFT PROTOCOL:  Amb. Annette des Iles (Trinidad and Tobago) introduced  A/AC.237/L.23, the draft protocol submitted on behalf of  AOSIS in September 1994, in accordance with Article 17 of  the Convention. She noted that the protocol does not impose  any additional obligations on developing country Parties.  Its specific provisions include the following:The Preamble  emphasizes that the burden of achieving the Convention's  objectives rests with the developed States. In Article 1  (Definitions) Sections (1), (7) and (8) differentiate  between Parties to the Protocol and Parties to the  Convention. Article 2 (Basic Commitment) restates the core  of the commitment contained in Article 4(1)(b) of the  Convention. Article 3 (Targets for greenhouse gas  reductions) is based on the Toronto target. It requires  developed country Parties to the Protocol who are included  in Annex I to reduce their C02 emissions by 2005 to a level  at least 20% below that of 1990 and to establish timetables  for controlling emissions of other greenhouse gases. Article  3(1)(b) requires that Annex I Parties adopt specific targets  on other greenhouse gases. Article 3(2) (Review and revision  of targets) authorizes the Meeting of the Parties to review  and revise both the C02 targets and timetable and the  controls for other greenhouse gases. Article 3(3) (Accession  of non-Annex I Parties to the specific commitments) says the  commitments are binding only on the Annex I Parties. Article  4 (Coordination Mechanism) creates a subsidiary body to  provide advice to the Meeting of the Parties. Article 5  (Reporting Requirements) includes a new reporting  requirement in Article 5(2) that Annex I Parties provide a  cost/benefit analysis of measures undertaken. Article 6  (Institutional Arrangements) uses institutions established  under the Convention. Article 7 (Technology transfer)  requires that the best available technologies...are  expeditiously transferred to developing countries under  fair and most favourable conditions. Article 8 establishes  a Meeting of the Parties with powers to review the  Protocol's implementation. Article 9 (Dispute settlement)  states that disputes are to be settled in accordance with  the Convention. Article 10 establishes the same procedure  for amendments to the Protocol as amendments to the  Convention.

Dr. Michael von Websky (Germany) introduced  A/AC.237/L.23/Add.1 and noted that the proposal addresses  targets and timetables, as well as policies and measures. He  said ambitious reduction targets for C02 and other  greenhouse gases, such as methane and N2 O, would make it  possible to formulate clear political objectives. He  suggested the broader application of economic instruments,  increasing energy efficiency, increased use of renewable  energy sources, the preservation, sustainable management and  improvement of existing forests, and afforestation. He said  a consensus was required at the COP on a commitment by Annex  I Parties to stabilize their C02 emissions, individually or  jointly, at 1990 levels by 2000.

### AGENDA ITEM 4  REVIEW OF ANNEXES TO THE CONVENTION

The  Czech Republic announced that his Government should be  prepared to amend Annex I at COP-2. In response to a  question from Japan, the Chair said Czechoslovakia was an  Annex I country and since it has been succeeded by two  countries, the annex has to be amended accordingly.

AGENDA ITEM 5(c)  PHYSICAL LOCATION OF THE PERMANENT  SECRETARIAT: The Chair reminded delegates that a contact  group was established to advise the Committee on the  location of the Secretariat. He then gave the floor to the  representatives of the countries offering to host the  Secretariat. The information about each offer is contained  in A/AC.237/79/Add.4. Canada explained how Toronto is a  leader in environmental protection and a multicultural city  that is well suited to host the Secretariat. Germany  outlined its proposal to host the Secretariat in Bonn, which  has excellent communications and transportation facilities  and is a major academic, scientific and cultural center.  Switzerland said that the choice for the Secretariat's  location should be based on effectiveness, not finance or  prestige, and that Geneva, as a UN centre, would be the most  effective. While Uruguay could not offer monetary subsidies  or financial assistance to developing countries, the low  cost of living and services in Montevideo would amply offset  the absence of generous subsidies. Kenya announced that it  has withdrawn its offer to host the Secretariat. Further  discussion will take place on Friday.

# WORKING GROUP I

## AGENDA ITEM 7(b)  ADEQUACY OF COMMITMENTS

Following the  introduction of the AOSIS protocol and German elements paper  in the Plenary, Working Group I resumed its discussion of  Agenda Item 7(b), Adequacy of Commitments. New Zealand,  Hungary, France (on behalf of the EU), Japan, Canada,  Denmark, Switzerland, Norway, the Netherlands, Australia,  Belgium, Sweden and Mexico said commitments under Article  4.2(a) and (b) are not sufficient. New Zealand, supported by  Japan, Switzerland, Norway, Australia and others, called for  a consultative mechanism to create a dialogue with business  interests. Saudi Arabia and Kuwait did not support this  proposal since it would impose new conditionalities on  developing countries. Hungary said that COP-1 should begin  negotiations, and that Annex I countries could make  commitments beyond 2000. France, on behalf of the EU,  supported a comprehensive protocol on all GHGs. He said that  COP-1 must at least initiate negotiations on a protocol and  that negotiations should occur in an ad hoc working group.  He also called for agreements on coordinated policies and  measures where competitiveness concerns exist. Japan said  that there is an emerging consensus that a new international  framework should be considered. He suggested completing  protocol negotiations by COP-3, under the SBI. Switzerland  said an ad hoc working group should prepare a protocol for  adoption by 1998. Norway said launching negotiations on new  and binding commitments should be COP-1's top priority.

The Russian Federation said it would be premature to take on  new commitments, and that the German proposal does not  provide for countries with economies in transition. The  Netherlands said it is absolutely necessary to develop new  agreements beyond 2000, and called for Annex I Parties to  promise not to increase emissions even if no agreement is in  place. Australia said negotiations should take place in a  body established under SBI authority and conclude by 1998 to  leave time for ratification by 2000. Sweden suggested  setting a joint target under which countries would reduce  emissions as a percentage of total global emissions.

The Philippines, on behalf of the G-77 and China, noted that  one of the cardinal principles of the Convention is common  but differentiated responsibilities. He said that repair  for damage to the environment should be borne by those  principally responsible for the damage. Any attempt to  reassign responsibilities could be interpreted as  transferring the burden to the victims rather than the  perpetrators of climate change. He added that the necessary  improvements could be made at a more opportune time.  Argentina, Fiji, Colombia, Mauritius, Chile, Malaysia and  Bolivia supported the AOSIS protocol, while expressing  concern that Annex I Parties were not able to meet current  commitments. Saudi Arabia and Kuwait urged caution in  accepting new commitments, given scientific uncertainty and  the inability of Annex I Parties to meet existing  commitments. China said protocol negotiations were premature  and noted that neither the best available scientific  information nor the national communications provided a  sufficient basis for renegotiating. Germany reiterated the  need for a protocol on greenhouse gas reduction in all  countries and a consensus at COP-1 by Annex I Parties to  stabilize emissions at 1990 level by the year 2000. The US  highlighted the need for new aims, including a common menu  of action, review of national communications by the SBSTA  and strengthening the process of negotiations through the  SBI to anchor the post-2000 era. France called for cost- benefit analysis of targets and timetables. Some developing  countries, including Iran, Uganda, Kenya, Mali and Algeria,  urged Annex I Parties to meet their commitments.

# WORKING GROUP II

Working Group II completed discussion on the maintenance of  interim financial arrangements and continued its discussion  of the unresolved paragraphs in A/AC.237/Misc.41 on guidance  to the financial mechanism.

AGENDA ITEM 8(b)  MAINTENANCE OF INTERIM FINANCIAL  ARRANGEMENTS: The afternoon session opened with a report  from John Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda) on the results of the  small working group addressing unresolved issues on the  maintenance of interim arrangements. The group agreed on the  following. The restructured GEF shall continue, on an  interim basis, to be the international entity entrusted with  the operation of the financial mechanism referred to in  Article 11. In accordance with Article 11.4 of the  Convention, the COP will review the financial mechanism  within four years and take appropriate measures, including a  determination of the definitive status of the GEF in the  context of the Convention. The US accepted this, but  reiterated that the text does not inspire confidence in the  GEF.

AGENDA ITEM 8(a)(I)  GUIDANCE: The Group then resumed  consideration of A/AC.237/Misc.41.

Sub-paragraphs 1(b)(I)-(iv): India, supported by Saudi  Arabia, Iran and Egypt, proposed deleting sub-paragraphs  (ii) (information from financial institutions) and (iv)  (promoting consistency) because they imposed new  conditionalities on activities undertaken outside the  framework of the financial mechanism. The US, Australia and  the EU expressed concern about the placement of sub- paragraph (iii), which prohibits new forms of  conditionality, in this paragraph. The Co-Chair summarized  that developing countries prefer keeping (ii), developed  countries prefer (iii), and (iv) is a problem for everyone.

Sub-paragraph 1(a)(vii): Based on the concern that the  proposed language confused the responsibilities of the COP  and the entity operating the financial mechanism, France  offered substitute text that attempted to clarify the roles.

Sub-paragraph 2(b): France, supported by the US, suggested  deleting this sub-paragraph, on assistance for research and  development, stating that the entity should fund specific  projects relevant to national programmes, not new or  existing institutions. India, Benin, Brazil, China and  Colombia stressed the need for including existing  institutions and networking to facilitate technology  transfer. India agreed to limit the provision to existing  institutions, but Sri Lanka and Kuwait commented that they  have no existing institutions. The US voiced concern over  the commercial connotation of research and development.  The Co-Chair recommended continuing this discussion on  Thursday.

Paragraph 2(d): Delegates redrafted this paragraph as  follows: The operating entity or entities should, in  accordance with the policies, programme priorities and  eligibility criteria as established by the COP, [be  available to assist, if so requested/give priority to  assisting developing country Parties] in the implementation  of the national programmes adopted by developing country  Parties. Germany and the Netherlands preferred the second  bracketed option. The US, supported by the Netherlands,  proposed moving sub-paragraph 1(a)(v) to follow 2(d), since  it deals with the same topic. The Chair and India disagreed  since 1(a)(v) deals with policies and 2(d) addresses  priorities.

Paragraph 2(e): Australia proposed maintaining this  paragraph on supporting activities to mitigate greenhouse  gas emissions. The EU proposed expanding the paragraph to  provide greater detail about how the financial mechanism  will support mitigation activities and will circulate its  text.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

The bidding war is on. Canada, Germany, Switzerland and  Uruguay are actively campaigning to be selected as the host  for the Permanent Secretariat. While Bonn and Geneva may be  the front runners, there is clearly no consensus yet. For  Canada, Switzerland and Uruguay a decision at INC-11 would  be to their advantage. If a decision is postponed until COP- 1, Bonn is clearly the favorite. But then, as one delegate  pointed out, there is always the possibility that the  decision will be postponed by COP-1 and that Geneva could  remain the interim location for the foreseeable future.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### WORKING GROUP I

Working Group I will continue its  discussion of the adequacy of commitments this morning.  Agenda Item 7(c), Criteria for joint implementation, is  scheduled to be discussed in the afternoon.

### WORKING GROUP II

This morning, Working Group II will  continue its discussion on guidance for the financial  mechanism. In the afternoon, the Group is scheduled to  discuss Agenda Item 9, Provision of technical and financial  support to developing countries.