---
title: "HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE FOURTH UNFCCC CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES, 10 NOVEMBER 1998"
id: enb1294e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1294e
date: 1998-11-10
abstract: "Draft decisions and conclusions were considered by the  Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA),  the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) and a joint  SBSTA/SBI contact group and plenary. Delegates could not reach  agreement and a number of decisions will be forwarded to the COP  plenary with brackets. The joint session concluded at 4:10 am."
---

# SBSTA

Under the draft conclusions on impacts of single projects on  emissions in the commitment period, (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.9;  FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.10; FCCC/SBSTA/1998/MISC.11 and Add.1),  SBSTA would further consider the issue at its tenth session.  Supporting the draft decision, AOSIS cautioned against granting  exemptions prior to the Protocol's entry into force and said  Parties should explore other options. ICELAND stressed that only  projects with demonstrable global benefit would fall under the  draft decision, if they could not be accommodated within the  Party's assigned amount. On the issue of precedence, he said  other cases should be valued on their own merits. The draft  conclusions and decisions were adopted.

The draft conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.10) on methodological  issues noted the preparations of a workshop to be held from 9-11  December to resolve the identified methodological issues on GHG  inventories. It requested the Secretariat to, inter alia,  prepare a report on the revised guidelines for Annex I  communications, particularly on the GHG inventory section, and  consult with the IPCC on a comprehensive joint plan for the  inventory programme. The conclusions were adopted with some  textual modifications.

SBSTA adopted its draft report for the ninth session  (FCCC/SBSTAA/1998/L.8). The final report will include the  RUSSIAN FEDERATION's objection to procedural steps embodied in  the recommendation on the relationship between the Montreal  Protocol and the FCCC (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.8).

The draft conclusions on technology transfer  (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/CRP.11) requested the SBSTA Chair to establish  a consultative process, constituting regional workshops and  meetings to implement FCCC Article 4.5 (technology transfer).  Parties are invited to provide submissions to the Secretariat by  15 March 1999 in response to the issues listed in the Annex to  the decision.

Delegates adopted most of the text unchanged, modifying the  preamble to reflect the role of the private sector in some  countries. A paragraph requesting SBSTA to establish a  consultative process to consider the issues listed in the Annex  engendered debate. The G-77/CHINA favored retaining reference to  a technology transfer mechanism and considering the paragraph  along with a bracketed reference in the Annex, which required  consideration of appropriate mechanisms for technology transfer  with the UNFCCC. The PHILIPPINES suggested a body was needed to  operationalize the process, adding that experts involved in the  consultative process should be from the FCCC roster of experts.  The US, with the EU, said the aim of the consultative process  should be 'meaningful and effective action.' The G-77/CHINA  favored 'technology transfer mechanism,' but indicated  willingness to accept 'meaningful and effective action' if  brackets were removed from the Annex.

The Chair closed the formal meeting and began informal  discussions. The EU said the Annex was not a negotiated text and  supported the US proposal to leave the debate to the high-level  segment, as it related to other issues under negotiation. The  Chair proposed compromise wording. After some debate, the Chair  invited the EU, the US and the G-77/China to discuss the issue  informally.

SBSTA reconvened at approximately 12:30 am. Chair Chow reported  that participants in the afternoon's consultations had agreed to  let the Chair make a proposal. He proposed the following: 'to  achieve agreement on a framework for meaningful and effective  actions.' The reference to 'technology transfer mechanism' would  be deleted. The text would also have SBSTA draw from the 'roster  of experts.' A bracketed reference in the Annex would ask  whether existing multilateral mechanisms were sufficient.

The Chair attempted to accept the text, but the US objected.  CHINA expressed regret that implementation of this FCCC  commitment was being delayed once again. SBSTA accepted the  text, and the Chair said the record would note the US objection.  The US, supported by JAPAN, said the action was inappropriate  and a statement in the record was insufficient. He said the  record should indicate that the decision was accepted in the  face of objection. He will raise the issue in the COP plenary.

# SBI

In describing the results of the contact group on FCCC Articles  4.8 and 4.9 (adverse effects), Co-Chair Bo Kjellen (Sweden) said  the text reflects the objectives and there is general agreement  on outstanding issues. The two bracketed paragraphs in the  preamble reflected the lack of time for full negotiation. The G-77/CHINA said there were compromises even in the unbracketed  text. He said the group would accept the document, including the  brackets, to preserve momentum. The US, with the EU, said the  impression of general agreement was misleading. He said the  contact group never discussed this text and there was no  agreement on the work plan. SAUDI ARABIA stated there was no  consensus and suggested that if the whole text is bracketed,  then all texts should be bracketed.

On administrative and financial matters, the contact group Chair  reported that no agreement had been reached on the calendar of  meetings. The US highlighted concerns regarding dates in the  draft decision. The Executive Secretary reported that since  document FCCC/SBI/1998/INF.6 was distributed, additional  financial contributions had been received from several Parties.  MAURITANIA objected to changes in the text proposed by the  Chair. The text was adopted with the exclusion of the calendar  of meetings.

The Co-Chairs of the contact group on national communications  from Annex I Parties indicated that consensus was reached. The  G-77/CHINA proposed bracketing a paragraph in the Annex that  notes many Annex I Parties will not reduce GHGs to 1990 levels.  They said this issue became linked to discussion on FCCC Article  4.2 (a) and (b) (adequacy of commitments). MAURITANIA asked the  Chair not to reopen debate on an agreed decision. The text was  accepted with brackets.

On initial national communications from non-Annex I Parties,  contact group Co-Chair Paul Maclons (South Africa) reported on  the draft decision. The EU bracketed a paragraph regarding  requests to the Secretariat. The G-77/CHINA bracketed the entire  text. CHINA and SAUDI ARABIA said the Chair should not allow  further negotiation on the text. After lengthy debate, the Chair  called on delegates to respect the rules and said the entire  text would be bracketed for consideration by the COP Plenary.

On the second review of adequacy of FCCC Article 4.2 (a) and  (b), contact group Co-Chair Jennifer Irish (Canada) reported  that the group agreed the commitments were inadequate, but did  not agree on reasons nor on actions required. She presented a  recommendation that the Chair conduct further consultations. Co- Chair Margaret Mukahanana (Zimbabwe) said the difficulty on  reaching a consensus was based on different interpretations of  adequacy of commitments. The Chair asked delegates to forward  the five draft decisions to the COP Plenary.

Co-Chair John Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda) presented the draft  decision on the financial mechanism. He noted that there were no  brackets in the text, but one group had indicated its dissent.  The EU bracketed paragraphs on GEF funding for implementing  adaptation responses and meeting full agreed costs. The US  bracketed language on international centers. The G-77/CHINA  bracketed the entire text. The text was accepted with brackets.  SBI then adopted the draft report of its ninth session  (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/L.8)

# JOINT CONTACT GROUP ON MECHANISMS

The contact group on flexibility mechanisms considered the  initial work programme on Protocol mechanisms. In addition to  the G-77/China proposal submitted earlier, draft work programmes  were submitted by AUSTRALIA (on behalf of CANADA, ICELAND, NEW  ZEALAND, NORWAY, the RUSSIAN FEDERATION and the US), JAPAN,  SWITZERLAND and the Co-Chairs. After extensive deliberations,  Co-Chair Yvo de Boer (Netherlands) suggested textual amendments.  The title of the work programme would include a footnote stating  'the existence of elements in this list is without prejudice to  inclusion of these items in the rules, modalities and guidelines  developed for these mechanisms.' The discussion on principles  would be limited to the 'application of existing principles,'  and the references to FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9 (adverse  effects) would be deleted.

At the request of G-77/CHINA, the Parties reconvened later to  discuss the draft as amended by the Co-Chairs. SAUDI ARABIA,  with QATAR, said it would support the Co-Chairs' amended text,  if FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9 were included. UGANDA said all the  references to FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9 should be deleted, as  they were under deliberation elsewhere. The Co-Chairs concluded  that they would report to the joint session that contact group  could not find a 'consensus modality on a way forward.'

# SBSTA/SBI JOINT SESSION

The joint SBSTA/SBI session discussed the review of progress  under the pilot phase of AIJ, Protocol Articles 6, 12, and 17,  and preparations for COP/MOP-1. On the review of progress under  the AIJ pilot phase, Chair Cornelia Quennet-Thielen (Germany)  presented a draft decision (FCCC/SB/1998/CRP.3) based on  informal consultations. The G-77/CHINA opposed text on crediting  for AIJ pilot phase projects and proposed an amendment on  continuing the AIJ pilot phase, focusing on developing  countries. The US and SLOVENIA opposed the change, noting it  excluded certain groups of Parties. AUSTRALIA said incentives  were needed for the private sector. The draft decision was  forwarded to Plenary.

On Protocol Articles 6, 12 and 17, Co-Chairs Luiz Gylvan Meira  Filho (Brazil) and Yvo de Boer (the Netherlands) reported that  the joint contact group did not agree on a draft work programme.  The EU and AUSTRALIA and others put forward the documents they  had produced for the contact group. Co-Chairs Kante and Chow  distributed a draft decision on the work progamme on mechanisms.  The G-77/CHINA urged discussion of the contact group Co-Chairs'  draft, with CHINA opposing the use of other documents. SOUTH  AFRICA and UGANDA rejected the G-77/CHINA position, saying they  were unaware the group had discussed the new proposal. With the  US, EU, CANADA, JAPAN, KUWAIT and AUSTRALIA, the AFRICAN GROUP  favored bracketing the new Co-Chairs' draft entirely. VENEZUELA  said forwarding the Co-Chairs' text would require formulation of  a joint Subsidiary Bodies' position. KUWAIT suggested the draft  decision of the SBSTA/SBI Co-Chairs be forwarded to the COP as a  Chair's text. Co-Chair Kante suggested forwarding both texts to  the Plenary: the draft work plan proposed by the contact group  Co-Chairs and the draft decision proposed by the SBSTA/SBI Co- Chairs. Delegates agreed but it remained uncertain which of the  texts would be bracketed.

On matters related to decision 1/CP.3, paragraph 6 (preparations  for COP/MOP-1) the Chair of the informal consultations, Espen  Ronneberg (Marshall Islands) reported that work was not  concluded due to time constraints. He offered an informal paper  with an annex containing an initial list of work. Co-Chair Chow  suggested further deliberations. SAUDI ARABIA said it would  accept this on the condition that the issue of Protocol Articles  4.8 and 4.9 (adverse effects) be resolved at COP-4. The Co- Chairs forwarded the paper to the COP.

MAURITANIA and the Co-Chairs proposed a draft decision urging  Parties to sign and ratify the Kyoto Protocol. JAPAN recalled  that the draft decision on Article 4.2(a) and (b) contained a  bracketed sentence urging Parties to ratify. The US said it was  not in a position to urge ratification and suggested postponing  the decision. The draft decision was forwarded to the COP.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

## Presidential Ceremony

The Presidential Ceremony is expected to  begin at 10:00 am.