---
title: "UN FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE:: YEAR-END UPDATE"
id: 1225000e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/1225000e
date: 
abstract: "Although the second meeting of the Conference of the Parties  (COP) to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change will  not take place until July 1996, there have been several  intersessional meetings to report on since the first meeting  of the COP in April 1995. This special year-end issue of the  Earth Negotiations Bulletin will review these activities,  summarize the results of the General Assembly's  consideration of the Convention, and highlight upcoming  events."
---

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE CONVENTION

Increasing scientific evidence about the possibility of  global climate change in the 1980s led to a growing  consensus that human activities have been contributing to  substantial increases in the atmospheric concentrations of  greenhouse gases. Concerned that anthropogenic increases of  emissions enhance the natural greenhouse effect and would  result, on average, in an additional warming of the Earth's  surface, the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the  United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) established the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in 1988.  The Panel focused on: assessing scientific information  related to the various aspects of climate change; evaluating  the environmental and socio-economic impacts of climate  change; and formulating response strategies. In 1990, the  finalization and adoption of the IPCC report and the Second  World Climate Conference focused further attention on  climate change.

## ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INC/FCCC

On 11 December 1990, the 45th session of the UN General  Assembly adopted a resolution that established the  Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee for a Framework  Convention on Climate Change (INC/FCCC). Supported by UNEP  and WMO, the mandate of the INC/FCCC was to prepare an  effective framework convention on climate change. The INC  held five sessions between February 1991 and May 1992.  During these meetings, participants from over 150 States  discussed the contentious issues of binding commitments,  targets and timetables for the reduction of carbon dioxide  emissions, financial mechanisms, technology transfer, and  'common but differentiated' responsibilities of developed  and developing countries. The INC sought to achieve a  consensus that could be supported by a broad majority,  rather than drafting a treaty that dealt with specific  policies that might limit participation.

## ADOPTION AND ENTRY INTO FORCE

The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  was adopted on 9 May 1992, and was opened for signature at  the UN Conference on Environment and Development in June   1992 in Rio de Janeiro, where it received 155 signatures.  The Convention entered into force on 21 March 1994, 90 days  after receipt of the 50th ratification.

After the adoption of the Convention, the INC met five more  times to consider the following items: matters relating to  commitments; arrangements for the financial mechanism and  for technical and financial support to developing countries;  procedural and legal issues; and institutional matters.  During these INC sessions, scientific work was undertaken to  improve the methodologies for measuring emissions from  various sources, but the larger scientific problem was  determining the best methodology to estimate the removal of  carbon dioxide by 'sinks,' namely oceans and forests. The  other major task before negotiators was the difficult issue  of financial support for implementation, particularly for  developing country Parties who will require 'new and  additional financial resources' to obtain data and implement  energy-efficient technologies and other necessary measures.

The eleventh and final session of the INC met from 6-17  February 1995, at UN Headquarters in New York. During the  two-week session, delegates addressed a wide range of issues  including arrangements for the first session of the COP,  location of the Permanent Secretariat, rules of procedure  for the COP, matters relating to commitments, arrangements  for the financial mechanism, and provision of technical and  financial support to developing country Parties.

While delegates did agree to maintain the Global Environment  Facility (GEF) as the interim entity to operate the  financial mechanism and to finance mitigation activities,  little concrete progress was made on other important issues  before the Committee. Delegates were unable to take action  on the adequacy of commitments or to begin negotiations on  the draft protocol submitted by AOSIS or the proposals for  further elements of a protocol submitted by Germany. There  was no progress on joint implementation. Delegates had  little time to address technical and financial support to  developing countries. The location of the Permanent  Secretariat remained pending, although the four countries  offering to host the Secretariat (Canada, Germany,  Switzerland and Uruguay) were asked to negotiate among  themselves to present a single nomination to the COP in  Berlin. Finally, delegates were unable to reach agreement on  the rules of procedure due to lack of agreement on voting  procedures and the allocation of seats on the COP Bureau.

## CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES

The first meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the UN  Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP-1) took place in  Berlin from 28 March - 7 April 1995. In this historic city  that was once the symbol of the Cold War's division between  East and West, delegates from 117 Parties and 53 observer  States found that although the Berlin Wall has fallen, the  walls that divide the Parties to the Convention still stand.  After hours of negotiations and consultations, delegates  with vastly different priorities and concerns came to  agreement on what many believed to be the central issue   before COP-1 - adequacy of  commitments. The result was a  mandate to launch a process toward appropriate action for  the period beyond the year 2000, including the strengthening  of the commitments of developed countries.

Delegates also reached agreement on a number of other  important decisions, including the establishment of a pilot  phase for implementation of joint projects, agreement that  the Permanent Secretariat will be located in Bonn, Germany,  and decisions on the budget for the Secretariat, financial  procedures and the establishment of the subsidiary bodies.  Delegates, however, did not reach consensus on the rules of  procedure. This critical issue, including a decision on the  voting rules and the composition of the Bureau, was deferred  until COP-2.

# INTERSESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS

## SUBSIDIARY BODY ON SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL ADVICE (SBSTA)

The SBSTA was established by COP-1 to be the link between  scientific, technical and technological assessments,  information provided by competent international bodies, and  the policy-oriented needs of the COP.

The first meeting of the SBSTA was held in Geneva from 28-30  August 1995. Delegates confronted a daunting array of  technically and politically complex issues, including:  scientific assessments, national communications from Annex I  Parties, methodologies, first communications from non-Annex  I Parties, activities implemented jointly under the pilot  phase, transfer of technology, allocation and control of  international bunker fuels, possible contributions to the  'Berlin Mandate' process, cooperation with competent  international bodies, including the IPCC, proposals on  longer term activities, and a workshop on NGO inputs. The  SBSTA was also supposed to establish intergovernmental  technical advisory panels on technologies (TAP-T) and  methodologies (TAP-M). However, the SBSTA did not have time  to consider all of these issues. Among the more contentious  issues were: definition of the SBSTA's relationship with the  IPCC, the terms of reference and composition of the TAPs and  the elaboration of guidelines for national communications  from non-Annex I Parties. By the end of the meeting,  delegates successfully identified areas for cooperation with  the IPCC, agreed on a division of labor with the SBI on  technology transfer issues, and requested the Secretariat to  organize a workshop on non-governmental inputs, among other  things. However, no progress was made on the formation of  the TAPs and delegates had no choice to resume this  discussion at the second session. (See Earth Negotiations  Bulletin Vol. 12 No. 23.)

## SUBSIDIARY BODY ON IMPLEMENTATION (SBI)

The first meeting of the SBI took place from 31 August - 1  September 1995 in Geneva. The SBI addressed: communications  from Annex I Parties; a progress report on in-depth review;  institutional and budgetary matters; matters relating to the  financial mechanism; and the elaboration and scheduling of  the programme of work for 1996-1997. Delegates rapidly   adopted the SBI's work programme and recommended that the  COP adopt the draft Memorandum of Understanding with the GEF  as the financial mechanism, and proposed a draft decision on  this item to be adopted by the COP at its second session.  (See Earth Negotiations Bulletin Vol. 12 No. 23.)

## FIRST SESSION OF THE AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE

COP-1 established an open-ended Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin  Mandate (AGBM) through decision FCCC/CP/1995/7/Add.1/  Decision 1/CP.1. In this decision, known as the 'Berlin  Mandate' (BM), the COP agreed to begin a process to  strengthen the commitments on the part of industrialized  countries to reduce greenhouse gas emissions beyond the year  2000 through the adoption of a protocol or other legal  instrument.

At its first session, which was held in Geneva from 21-25  August 1995, the AGBM considered several issues, including  an analysis and assessment to identify possible policies and  measures for Annex I Parties and requests for inputs to  subsequent sessions. Delegates debated the nature, content  and duration of the analysis and assessment and its  relationship to other aspects of the process. Several  developed and developing countries stressed that analysis  and assessment should be conducted in parallel and not prior  to the negotiations, but a few developing countries held  that more time was needed, particularly to evaluate economic  costs. Regarding inputs to subsequent sessions, delegates  differed widely in the number of requested inputs. Some  developed countries emphasized the need to avoid delay,  while others sought a more comprehensive approach to  increase the AGBM's options. Many developing countries  requested minimal inputs, stating that a wealth of  information already existed, while a few, mainly oil  producing countries, emphasized the need for further study  on the economic impacts. (See Earth Negotiations Bulletin Vol. 12 No. 22.)

## SECOND SESSION OF THE AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE

The second session of the AGBM was held in Geneva from 30  October - 3 November 1995. Debate over the extent of  analysis and assessment continued, but delegates also heard  new ideas for the structure and form of a possible protocol.  During the week-long meeting, delegates considered:  strengthening of commitments in Article 4.2 (a) and (b),  regarding policies and measures, as well as quantified  emission limitation and reduction objectives within  specified time-frames; advancing the implementation Article  4.1; and possible features of a protocol or other legal  instrument.

During the meeting, Spain, on behalf of the European Union,  submitted an outline for a protocol or legal instrument. The  outline did not include proposals on policies, measures,  objectives or time-frames, but was organized on three  principles: consistency with prior AGBM discussions;  creating a dynamic instrument that can develop over time;   and linking measures to existing Convention provisions where  they apply. The outline includes six articles: commitments  by developed and other Annex I Parties, including a section  on voluntary application by non-Annex I Parties; commitments  by all Parties; review of commitments; cross-references to  FCCC articles; amendment procedures, including simplified  procedures for annexes; and final clauses. It would include  three annexes of policies and measures: those applicable to  all Annex I Parties; those agreed as high priority in  national programmes; and those to be considered in national  programmes, as appropriate. While delegates did not decide  to adopt this outline, they did agree that it merits further  consideration. (See Earth Negotiations Bulletin Vol. 12 No.  24.)

## 11TH SESSION OF THE IPCC

The eleventh session of the Intergovernmental Panel on  Climate Change (IPCC) met in Rome from 11-15 December 1995.  Some 500 experts from 120 countries attended the meeting to  adopt the Second Assessment Report, which was drawn up with  the help of 2,000 scientists worldwide.

Like its First Assessment Report, which was published in  1990, the IPCC's Second Assessment Report was prepared by  three working groups. Working Group I analyzed the  functioning of the climate system and potential changes to  it resulting from human activities. Working Group II  assessed potential impacts of climate change, adaptation  strategies, and measures that could be adopted to reduce  greenhouse gas emissions. Working Group III focused on  evaluating the economic implications of climate change.

The draft Second Assessment Report, which highlights a  'discernible human influence' on climate, goes beyond the  1990 report when human influence on climate was something  that could not really be concluded at all. WMO Secretary- General Godwin Obasi told the delegates at the opening  ceremony this conclusion was 'a warning to humanity that we  have gone beyond the point where the sustainable use of the  atmosphere as a highly mobile dump for man's waste is  possible without serious consequences'.

Based on the findings of the three working groups, the draft  report says that the earth's temperature could rise by  between one and 3.5 degrees Celsius by the year 2010 - an  average rate of warming probably higher than any in the last  10,000 years. It says it would expect temperatures to  continue rising after that, even if emissions of the  greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and methane that  trap heat in the atmosphere were stabilized at that time.

While not all scientists agree on the causes, or even the  phenomenon of global warming, most believe the build-up of  such gases, to a large part caused by burning fossil fuels,  could have drastic consequences. The draft IPCC report came  under fire from major oil producing countries, who want no  action on cutting emissions until there is scientific  certainty. These countries spent much of the week attempting  to block adoption of the report.

The IPCC report will be published in the following three   volumes in early 1996: Volume 1: The Science of Climate  Change; Volume 2: Scientific-Technical Analyses of Impacts,  Adaptations, and Mitigation of Climate Change; and Volume 3:  Economics and Social Dimensions. When published, they can be  ordered from: Cambridge University Press Distribution  Center, 110 Midland Ave, Port Chester, NY 10583 USA; tel:  +1-800-872-7423 (US); +1-914- 937-9600 (outside US); fax:  +1-914-937-4712; World Wide Web: http://www.cup.org

# GENERAL ASSEMBLY HIGHLIGHTS

The Second Committee of the UN General Assembly considered  Agenda Item 96(d), 'Protection of Global Climate for Present  and Future Generations,' on 15-16 November 1995. The  Executive Secretary of the Convention, Michael Zammit- Cutajar, presented the final report of the Chair of the  INC/FCCC (A/50/536) and the report of the Secretary-General  (A/50/716). The former lays out the preparatory work that  has been undertaken, describes the outcome of COP-1, and  assesses the current state of play in the Convention. The  report of the Secretary-General requests that the General  Assembly endorse the principle of an institutional linkage  between the Convention Secretariat and the United Nations.  It also appeals to the General Assembly to respond to the  COP's request to finance the conference-servicing costs of  the Convention bodies from the United Nations programme  budget. Such financing would specifically apply to six weeks  of meetings per year until the end of 1999. The report also  relates the Secretariat's plans both for the transfer of  fund balances remaining at the end of the year and for  transitional arrangements of administrative support to the  Convention Secretariat for the coming biennium. Cutajar  appealed to Parties to make their contributions to the 1996  Convention budget prior to 1 January 1996, and to the  General Assembly for a positive response to the request for  financing of conference services from the UN programme  budget.

On behalf of the President of the first session of the  Conference of the Parties, Angela Merkel, Minister for the  Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety of  Germany, Takao Shibata (Japan) reported on the  accomplishments of COP-1. Twenty-one decisions were adopted  by consensus. The Berlin Mandate was established and  provides a process for further commitments on the part of  industrialized countries to reduce greenhouse gas emissions  beyond the year 2000. As the majority of delegates agreed  that current commitments are inadequate to achieve the  objectives of the Convention, the Berlin Mandate will  address the need to quantify limitation and reduction  objectives within specific time-frames. COP-1 also took  decisions relating to the format and review of national  communications of Annex I Parties. Such communications will  be subject to an in-depth review by experts nominated by  both Annex I and non-Annex I Parties. This review process  should be completed by COP-2. Another achievement of COP-1  was the establishment of a pilot phase for activities  implemented jointly. Notable among the decisions regarding   the institutional arrangements for the Convention  Secretariat is the institutional linkage of the Secretariat  with the UN. This linkage will facilitate the work of the  Secretariat by providing it with an established framework of  rules and regulations, as well as appropriate administrative  support services. Along these lines, the COP requested that  the General Assembly finance the conference-servicing costs  of the sessions of the COP and its subsidiary bodies from  the UN programme budget.

### PHILIPPINES

On behalf of the G-77 and China, Cecilia  Baltazar Rebong reaffirmed the Group's commitment to the  objectives of the Convention, and to the fulfillment of  their obligations. The G-77 urges its developed country  partners to fulfill their obligations under the Convention,  particularly those pertaining to the provision of new and  additional financial resources and the transfer of  technology on preferential and concessional terms. It is  essential that immediate action be taken to address the  climate change issue, and this action must be predicated on  the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities.  The ratification of the Convention by 144 States and one  regional economic integration organization is an encouraging  indication that the global community agrees on the central  importance of global climate protection.

### SPAIN

Santiago Gomez-Acebo, on behalf of the European  Union, said the EU reaffirms its commitment to stabilize  carbon dioxide emissions at 1990 levels by the year 2000 and  called upon the other Annex I Parties to the Convention to  do the same. The decision contained in the Berlin Mandate -  to begin a process for taking action beyond the year 2000,  including the strengthening of commitments of the Parties  included in Annex I - is a major achievement. The European  Union trusts that the decision to establish the Secretariat  of the Convention in Bonn will contribute to setting the  future work of the Convention on solid ground.

### TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO

On behalf of the Alliance of Small  Island States (AOSIS), Amb. Annette des Iles noted the  particular vulnerability of small island States to the  consequences of global climate change, as evidenced by the  devastation caused by the recent onslaught of storms in the  Eastern Caribbean and the Pacific, and the pressing need to  take immediate action to deter global warming. The Draft  Protocol submitted to the Convention by AOSIS in September  1994, which recommended that developed countries reduce  their carbon dioxide emissions by at least 20% of 1990  levels by the year 2005, was not accepted as hoped at COP-1.  However, AOSIS was pleased with the Berlin Mandate, which  notes that current commitments are insufficient to fulfill  the mandate of the Convention. AOSIS will continue to work  with the Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate to ensure the  adoption of a legal instrument to achieve the additional and  necessary commitments called for in the Mandate. While the  Berlin Mandate is crucial in addressing further commitments  beyond the year 2000, it is critical that the current  commitments of the Convention be fulfilled, and that the   industrialized countries lead the way, as was expressly  called for in the Convention. The leadership role assigned  to the industrialized countries also entails the provision  of support and technology to developing countries to better  enable them to fulfill their commitments.

### SAMOA

Andrea Williams-Stewart reported that the annual  meeting of the South Pacific Forum took place in Papua New  Guinea two months ago, where the concerns of Pacific nations  regarding climate change were reaffirmed. She outlined two  matters of fundamental importance to the progress of the  AGBM. The first is the urgency of concluding the work of the  AGBM by 1997, so that its results can be considered at COP- 3. The second matter concerns the results of the IPCC's  Second Assessment Report, which clearly indicate the reality  of climate change and the necessity and economic feasibility  of taking urgent action. The fact that certain Parties are  requesting further analysis has raised concerns that the  work of the IPCC and others will be duplicated, and the  completion of the Berlin Mandate process will be delayed.  There have, however, been some promising initiatives made in  the AGBM process, such as the European Union's proposal for  an outline protocol framework, which was tabled at the last  session of the AGBM.

### INDIA

Sharad Pawar said that the Climate Change Convention  embodies not only the control of greenhouse gas emissions to  protect the global climate, but also the goals of poverty  eradication, achievement of sustained economic growth in  developing countries, and averting the negative impact of  climate change on food production and on the livelihood and  habitat of the poor. The ability to address all of these  issues depends on the obligations of the Annex I countries  to take the first steps - to fulfill their commitments under  the Convention, as well as to provide new and additional  resources and technologies to developing countries. Although  it has been acknowledged that the commitments under the  current Convention are inadequate, there has been reluctance  to proceed and define further reductions. In fact, after  Berlin, many are even challenging existing commitments. The  burden of reducing greenhouse gas emissions must be shared  equitably by developed and developing countries, and this  equity entails an understanding of historical and cumulative  emissions. Procrastination on the part of the developed  countries will only impair the ability of developing  countries to achieve their development aspirations and  worsen the situation for all inhabitants of the planet.

### PAPUA NEW GUINEA

Adam Vai Delaney said the threats of  global warming, sea-level rise, and the immense potential to  change the world's atmosphere, are central to understanding  the urgency of the issues related to the Convention. The  Berlin Mandate is not adequate. The decision concerning  concrete emissions reduction targets for the next century  needs strengthening. Necessary support should urgently be  given to the establishment of the permanent Secretariat in  Bonn. For the Convention to succeed, Annex I countries will  have to adopt a more constructive partnership and assume   responsibility for the huge quantities of greenhouse gases  they have emitted into the atmosphere over the last century.  The transfer of clean, affordable technologies is an  obligation under the Convention and will contribute towards  improving the efficiency of global energy consumption.

### VENEZUELA

Jacnedine Dordelly said her country has adopted  measures to prevent the emission of greenhouse gases. She  reaffirmed Venezuela's determination to do its share in the  international arena to address climate change issues.  Environmental protection must be compatible with economic  growth and sustainable development.

### CHINA

Yang Yanyi recalled the obligation of developed  countries to take the lead in combating climate change, and  to provide new and additional financial resources and  transfer environmentally sound technologies to assist the  developing countries in fulfilling their commitments. These  obligations have not been fulfilled, and the threat of  global climate change remains. The decisions taken at  Berlin, such as the establishment of the SBI and the SBSTA,  the agreement on the GEF as the interim financial mechanism,  and the pilot phase for activities implemented jointly, are  encouraging steps toward the realization of the goals of the  Convention. Most important, however, was the agreement to  intensify the commitments of the developed countries to  reduce their greenhouse gas emissions, which by no means  should increase the obligations of the developing countries.  China is committed to doing its part to address climate  change based on the principle of common but differentiated  responsibilities.

### MARSHALL ISLANDS

Espen Rønneberg stated that the findings  of the IPCC, which testify to the reality of climate change,  are indeed being confirmed by the increasing frequency and  severity of storms. These storms are ever more damaging to  the economies of the affected countries, particularly the  most vulnerable small island States. It is imperative that  the actions mandated in the Convention be undertaken  immediately to avert climatic disaster on a global scale.  Support and funding for adaptation measures should be a  priority, as should work on mitigation efforts. Urgent  attention should also be focused on the completion of the  work of the Berlin Mandate. Efforts to improve the prospects  for future global climatic stability must not be sacrificed  for short-term economic interests.

### FIJI

Graham E. Leung stated that the momentum must be  maintained to ensure that the work of the AGBM is completed  on time. The widest possible participation in these  negotiations should be supported, given the overriding  importance of strengthening the commitments of the  Convention. He expressed concern that at the conclusion of  the first session of COP-1, questions regarding rules of  procedure and the composition of the Bureau remained  unresolved. It is crucial that a representative of the small  island developing States be included on the Bureau of the  COP, considering their special stake in this issue. Matters  relating to rules of procedure are trivial in light of the   pressing need to strengthen commitments, and these matters  must therefore be resolved once and for all so that the  substantive and important work can be accomplished.

### REPUBLIC OF KOREA

Ha-Yong Moon urged the Parties to  establish goals and timetables for greenhouse gas emission  reductions as soon as possible. He stressed the importance  of acknowledging the principle of common but differentiated  responsibilities. The most effective way to ward off global  warming is to employ cleaner and more efficient  technologies, and these technologies must be made available  to developing countries. In this regard, the formation of  the Climate Technology Initiative (CTI) by the OECD is a  step in the right direction. Another crucial element in  combating global warming is scientific and technological  capacity-building in developing countries.

### EGYPT

Abdel-Gaffar Eldeeb said a clear link between climate  change and economic development must be established. Parties  to the Climate Change Convention must look at new  developments, since recent reports have emphasized that the  dangers of climate change have become a reality. An  additional protocol should be drafted to address these new  findings. Such a protocol should not pose additional burdens  on developing countries. Increasing emissions of greenhouse  gases from unsustainable patterns of production and  consumption in developed countries must be addressed.

### SRI LANKA

Prasad Kariyawasam said that Sri Lanka is in the  process of implementing its commitments under the Climate  Change Convention. An Inter-Ministerial Coordinating  Committee has been established to coordinate and monitor  activities applicable under the Convention. Sri Lanka became  a signatory to the Manila Declaration at the Asia Pacific  Leaders Conference on Climate Change. The country's first  report on greenhouse gas emissions has been prepared as part  of a regional study undertaken by the South Asian  Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC). The  possibility of establishing a separate financial mechanism  for the Convention should not be prematurely dismissed, in  light of the insufficiency of funds available from the GEF  for national projects pertinent to the Convention.

### IRAN

Mohammad Jabbary stated that developing countries  should not be expected to implement policies or accept  requirements that jeopardize their efforts toward social and  economic development and the eradication of poverty.  Furthermore, Annex I Parties, as the primary emitters of  greenhouse gases, have not made adequate attempts to fulfill  their commitments under the Convention. The necessary  transfers of technology and financial resources to  developing countries, as stipulated in the Convention, are  also sorely lacking. The objectives of the Convention will  be difficult to achieve in the presence of these  inconsistencies.

# GENERAL ASSEMBLY RESOLUTION

On 5 December 1995, the Second Committee adopted a draft  resolution (A/C.2/50/L.33), which had been submitted by Vice  Chair Conor Murphy (Ireland) after informal consultations.   The resolution endorses the institutional linkage between  the Secretariat of the Framework Convention on Climate  Change and the United Nations. The Secretary-General is  requested to review the functioning of this institutional  linkage no later than 31 December 1999. The resolution notes  that the Conference of the Parties to the Convention decided  to accept the offer of the Government of Germany to host the  Convention Secretariat and expresses its appreciation for  the support of the future host Government for the relocation  and effective functioning of the Secretariat.

The resolution also urges Parties to the Convention to pay  promptly their 1996 and 1997 contributions to the trust fund  for the core budget of the Convention to ensure continuity  in the cash flow required to finance the ongoing work of the  COP, its subsidiary bodies and the Convention Secretariat.  The resolution also decides that conference servicing will  be provided for twelve weeks of meetings in 1996-1997. The  Secretary-General is requested to include in the Calendar of  Conferences and meetings for the biennium 1998-1999 sessions  of the COP and its subsidiary bodies that the Conference may  need to convene in that period.

The statement on the financial implications of this  resolution is contained in document A/C.2/50/L.49.

The resolution is expected to be formally adopted by the  General Assembly Plenary before Christmas.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR IN 1996

### SUBSIDIARY BODIES MEETING

The second meeting of the  Subsidiary Body for Implementation and the Subsidiary Body  on Scientific and Technical Advice will take place in Geneva  from 26 February - 1 March 1996.

### AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE

The third meeting of the  Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate will take place from 4-7  March 1996 in Geneva. Delegates will consider: a  presentation by IPCC officers on the IPCC's latest findings;  a Secretariat compilation of Parties' additional ideas and  comments on policies and measures and a second compilation  of additional ideas on possible features of a protocol; a  document that follows up on the synthesized list of policies  and measures from Annex I Parties' national communications;  an informal session on quantified objectives and time-frames  and their impacts; a Secretariat paper on the links between  FCCC institutions and processes and a future legal  instrument; and a Secretariat review of existing relevant  conventions.

Future sessions of the AGBM are currently scheduled as  follows: AGBM 4: 8-19 July 1996, concurrently with COP-2;  AGBM 5: 21-25 October 1996; and AGBM 6: 10-14 March 1997.  The meetings will be held in Geneva until the Secretariat  relocates to Bonn.

### COP-2

The second meeting of the Conference of the Parties  to the Framework Convention on Climate Change will take  place from 8-19 July 1996 in Geneva.