---
title: "UNFCCC COP-10 HIGHLIGHTS"
id: enb12252e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12252e
date: 
abstract: "On Wednesday, COP-10 delegates continued their deliberations in a  COP Plenary, contact groups, and a SBSTA in-session workshop. The  COP addressed Protocol Article 6 (joint implementation), the  report of the CDM Executive Board (EB), and an exchange of views  on UNFCCC activities relevant to the international meeting for the  10-year review of the implementation of the Barbados Programme of  Action for the Sustainable Development of SIDS (BPOA+10), the  World Conference on Disaster Reduction (WCDR) and the process for  providing input to the fourteenth session of the Commission on  Sustainable Development (CSD-14). Contact groups also met to  consider the submission of non-Annex I national communications,  capacity building, issues relating to registry systems under  Protocol Article 7.4, the UNFCCC's financial mechanism, and  technology transfer. In the afternoon, an in-session workshop on  impacts of, and vulnerability and adaptation to, climate change  was held."
---

# COP PLENARY

### PREPARATION FOR COP/MOP-1

Matters relating to Protocol Article 6:  Noting a recent workshop on Article 6 held in Moscow, the RUSSIAN  FEDERATION emphasized the need for Parties to exchange information  on, and prepare, joint implementation (JI) project proposals. The  EU said efforts to make JI operational should be intensified.  BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY urged the development of long-term  approaches, that recognize economic development, poverty  eradication and social development priorities.

### REPORT OF THE CDM EB

CDM EB Chair John Kilani (South Africa)  reported on progress in the implementation of the CDM, focusing  on, inter alia, work on registration of CDM projects, approval of  methodologies, and accreditation of operational entities. JAPAN  and the EU urged greater transparency in the EB's work. The EU,  COSTA RICA and ARGENTINA stressed the need to prioritize energy  projects. ARGENTINA said EB members should be given privacy for  their discussions. INDIA expressed concerns regarding the EB's  interpretation of the additionality requirements in the Marrakesh  Accords. The US, supported by SAUDI ARABIA, said observers should  be allowed to physically attend open EB meetings and expressed  concern over JI Supervisory Committee and Compliance Committee  rules that limit attendance to Parties to the Protocol.

CHILE emphasized the need to safeguard the environmental integrity  of CDM projects, and, with others, to provide sufficient resources  to the EB. He proposed hiring permanent EB staff to save on costs  of hiring consultants. EGYPT and ALGERIA urged greater  simplification of modalities and procedures. MOROCCO called for  progress on consolidated methodologies for energy efficiency and  transportation, and, with BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY, urged greater  flexibility on additionality. The CLIMATE ACTION NETWORK welcomed  efforts by the EB to restrict HFC-23 (trifluoromethane) projects,  and called for the exclusion of nitrous oxide projects and  'avoided fuel switch' projects. The INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL FOR  LOCAL ENVIRONMENTAL INITIATIVES called on the EB to provide  guidance on methodologies for urban projects. Raúl Estrada-Oyuela  (Argentina) will chair a contact group on this issue.

### EXCHANGE OF VIEWS ON UNFCCC ACTIVITIES RELEVANT TO OTHER  INTERGOVERNMENTAL MEETINGS

ECUADOR outlined efforts being taken  in Latin America and the Caribbean regarding the WCDR. The  UMBRELLA GROUP said that the most appropriate input to these  meetings would be a factual report outlining relevant UNFCCC  activities and that Parties should not negotiate on the manner in  which the Secretariat reports on these activities. SAUDI ARABIA  said UNFCCC statements must reflect the consensus of the Parties.

AOSIS, with several others, highlighted the relevance of climate  change to the intergovernmental processes and urged the convening  of a workshop before COP-11 on developing an international  insurance facility to address damages from climate change impacts  in SIDS. He said COP-11 should consider the outcomes of the  BPOA+10 and provide inputs on climate change and sustainable  development to CSD-14. He also suggested establishing a workshop  prior to CSD-14 on climate change and energy for sustainable  development. The EU said COP-10 should provide input to the  Millennium +5 Summit. PANAMA recommended that a compendium of  national communications on climate change impacts and measures  taken should be forwarded to these meetings. The CLIMATE ACTION  NETWORK stressed that synergies and cooperation among UN bodies  are essential to building an adequate adaptation regime. A contact  group, chaired by José Romero (Switzerland), will address this  issue.

# CONTACT GROUPS

### NON-ANNEX I NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS

This contact group was  co-chaired by Soobaraj Nayroo Sok Appadu (Mauritius) and Anders  Turesson (Sweden) and addressed the submission of second and,  where appropriate, third national communications. Delegates  discussed the draft decision forwarded from SBI-20, and two  submissions, one by the G-77/China and the other by the US, that  focus on the timing of financing and completion of second or third  non-Annex I national communications. Parties exchanged initial  views on the submissions, stressing the importance of maintaining  the capacity in national teams that was built during the  preparation of initial national communications, assuring  continuity in the project cycle, and accessing funds promptly.

In response to the US' suggestion that non-Annex I Parties provide  regular updates to their greenhouse gas inventories, the G-77/CHINA  said that inventories are a 'non-issue' in the context of the  contact group's work as no COP decisions require such updates and  therefore the contact group should not address inventories. A  revised draft text will be compiled based on the submissions and  the existing draft decision.

### CAPACITY BUILDING

This contact group was co-chaired by Roger  Cornforth (New Zealand) and Shirley Moroka (South Africa).  Referring to decisions 2/CP.7 (capacity building in developing  countries) and 3/CP.7 (capacity building in countries with  economies in transition), Co-Chair Cornforth pointed to the need  for a review of the implementation of the capacity-building  frameworks. TANZANIA, for the G-77/China, underscored the  principles outlined in decision 2/CP.7 and said the Group will  provide a submission on 9 December to serve as a basis for further  discussion. The EU, US and others suggested instead that the  Co-Chairs draft a text based on input from all interested Parties  and relevant documents. Delegates agreed to consider the  G-77/China's text at the next meeting of the contact group.

### PROTOCOL ARTICLE 7.4

Murray Ward (New Zealand) chaired the  contact group, which addressed registries and the proposed  standard electronic reporting format. On issues relating to  registry systems, the Secretariat introduced a draft text and  presented an overview of the main issues.

### FINANCIAL MECHANISM

This contact group was co-chaired by Rawleston  Moore (Barbados) and Jozef Buys (Belgium). Co-Chair Buys requested  comments on the agenda sub-items on the Special Climate Change  Fund (SCCF) and matters related to the implementation of decision  5/CP.8 (review of the financial mechanism), and said that guidance  to the GEF will be addressed at a later meeting. SOUTH AFRICA, for  the G-77/China, reiterated concerns on the GEF adding  conditionalities to access the SCCF and suggested that the review  of the financial mechanism be addressed by SBI-22. On the review  of the financial mechanism, the EU recommended considering the  results of the GEF Third Overall Performance Study. The US and  CANADA said parameters from the previous review could be used.

### TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER

This contact group was co-chaired by Kishan  Kumarsingh (Trinidad and Tobago) and Holger Liptow (Germany).  Co-Chair Kumarsingh explained that SBSTA had requested the group  to prepare draft conclusions and a draft decision. JAPAN,  supported by the US, noted that the group did not need to produce  a draft decision. BANGLADESH proposed to consider biotechnology as  a technology for carbon capture. The US, supported by CANADA,  stated that technology transfer should be considered in the  context of Article 4.5 (technology transfer). The G-77/CHINA  called for targeted financial support for the enhancement of  indigenous technologies and technology transfer, and joint  research between developed and developing countries. He proposed  that the UNFCCC technology clearing house (TT:CLEAR) be funded by  the core budget. Some delegates proposed that the Secretariat  compile a report on technology needs derived from national reports.  Others said such work is already being done by other organizations.

# SBSTA IN-SESSION WORKSHOP ON IMPACTS OF, AND VULNERABILITY AND  ADAPTATION TO, CLIMATE CHANGE

This in-session workshop was chaired by SBSTA Chair Benrageb.  Delegates heard presentations by experts, interspersed with  question-and-answer discussions, and concluded with a wrap-up  session.

### PRESENTATIONS

Richard Klein, Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact  Research, Germany, addressed the research demands generated by  adaptation to climate change. He noted that scenarios and models  used to assess climate change impacts are not always useful for  assessing adaptation. Klein signaled a mismatch between impact  research that uses models with large spatial and temporal scales,  and adaptation research that uses qualitative methods based on  local data with a shorter-term approach. He suggested that  research should seek to match impact assessment with adaptation  assessment, and incorporate local conditions to provide decision  makers with information that is temporally and spatially  pertinent. He said such assessments should identify the  probability of impacts, the costs and benefits of different  adaptation measures and the opportunity costs of inaction in  this field.

In the ensuing discussion, participants highlighted the value of  local knowledge. Klein said that all knowledge - local and  traditional - should be considered and subject to the same  scrutiny as conventional scientific knowledge. FRANCE asked how  climate models could help authorities address severe weather  occurrences such as heat waves, and Klein explained that in this  case vulnerable sectors are determined by social factors not  related to climate. Responding to a question concerning the  uncertainty of these models, Klein replied that all models have a  measure of uncertainty, as does adaptation research, and therefore  researchers must seek to identify and reduce uncertainty to the  largest extent possible.

Linda Mearns, National Center for Atmospheric Research, US,  presented on the use of regional climate models in impact  assessments and adaptation studies. She noted that regional models  are particularly useful in assessing the impact of climate change  in islands, mountains, coastlines and areas of complex land-use  patterns. She said regional models could help to bridge the gap  between 'top-down' standards and 'bottom-up' adaptation, but noted  that such models must account for uncertainties of future emissions  pathways. She emphasized that regional and global models are useful  tools, but that their limitations should be recognized.

JAMAICA asked if regional models had been developed for the  Caribbean. Mearns pointed to regional climate assessments funded  by the GEF. CHINA commented on uncertainties in using global  climate models. Mearns said that although models have become more  sophisticated, assessments would benefit from including local  knowledge.

Rupa Kumar Kolli, The Energy and Resources Institute, India,  presented his experience in applying regional high-resolution  models in climate change scenarios for India. He highlighted that  local topographic characteristics are important to define the  intensity of climate phenomena such as monsoons. He demonstrated  how global model simulations have insufficient detail for  country-level assessments, and how regional models that operate on  a 50 km2 resolution provide more accurate results even if they use  data taken from global models. On the evaluation of the results of  regional models, Kolli underlined that the distribution of weather  stations on the ground determines the capacity for evaluation. He  said uncertainty may be reduced by providing more feedback to the  system on areas of high uncertainty, such as coastlines.

Judy Lawrence, Ministry of Environment, New Zealand, spoke on  tools to assess vulnerability and adapt to climate change in a  temperate developed agricultural economy. She explained how New  Zealand is enabling farmers to address the impacts of climate  change, by extending seasonal crop growth, diversifying types of  crops, and providing access to reliable climate information. She  noted that top-down assessments of impacts and vulnerability in  the agricultural sector have previously failed to reach farmers,  but that stakeholder participation in assessments is becoming more  common. She noted that New Zealand is also developing a national  sustainable development action plan on water.

Participants then discussed adaptation in the water sector,  research on vegetation, and cross-regional partnerships.

Marjorie Soto Franco, Red Cross Nicaragua, spoke on the general  approach, strategy and methods used for preparing for  climate-related disasters in a pilot project carried out on the  Caribbean coast of Nicaragua. She said the Red Cross' climate  change programme aims to link climate change experts and disaster  preparedness communities at all levels through awareness raising,  capacity building and advocacy. Describing the participatory  nature of the project, she noted that it addresses climate risks  through the development of methods and tools, the creation of  institutional dialogue, and the assessment of vulnerability and  capacity.

Robert Correll, Arctic Impact Assessment Council, US, presented  the results of the ongoing assessment of climate change impacts in  the Arctic. He noted the unique temperature and precipitation  characteristics of the Arctic, and highlighted that the impacts  are more severe and rapid than in other regions. Correll  underlined that the assessment, which draws on a variety of  sources, including indigenous knowledge, has identified that in  the next 100 years temperatures are expected to change by as much  as 10 degrees Celsius in some regions of the Arctic. He stated  that as ice disappears, livelihoods will be affected by changes in  ecosystems and animal range areas, and by the appearance of new  maritime transport routes. He explained that there is evidence of  ocean salinity loss due to massive quantities of water flowing  from ice-caps and that this will affect the thermohaline ocean  circulation, thus severely altering one of the main regulators of  the climate.

Joseph Konno, Environmental Protection Agency, Micronesia,  reviewed a project in his country that uses a 'climate proofing'  risk-based approach to adaptation. He reviewed the project's  application to road surface improvements, land-use planning  regulatory amendments, and national strategic development  planning. Noting challenges such as data scarcity, limited  resources, and difficulties in accessing funding and defining  acceptable risk, he said climate-proofed development projects  minimize long-term costs and improve long-term return on  investment.

Osvaldo Canziani, Universal Ecological Foundation, Argentina,  spoke on the fate of indigenous communities in the context of  climate change. He noted the work of the Millennium Ecosystem  Assessment and said that indigenous peoples are challenged by  several environmental issues, including climate change. He pointed  to food insecurity and water scarcity as two impacts of climate  change on indigenous peoples, noting that access to water will be  reduced dramatically by 2080.

Participants then engaged in a discussion on levels of  anthropogenic influence in the Arctic region, the role of  indigenous peoples in impact assessments, and how to transfer the  Arctic assessment experience to other regions.

### WRAP-UP

TUVALU stressed the urgency of addressing the needs of  the most vulnerable countries, and of moving from information- sharing and assessment to action. He stated that without taking  appropriate action to adapt to climate change, the sustainable  development of SIDS will be seriously impaired. BRAZIL pointed to  the Regional Climate Change Scenarios for South America programme  that will provide information on climate change impacts,  vulnerability assessments and adaptation, and said the information  will be accessible to South American countries.

The EU noted that adaptation is a short- to medium-term response  to climate variability that cannot counter the long-term impacts  of climate change. With JAPAN, he noted that more effective action  on mitigation is required to avoid exceeding critical thresholds.  CANADA supported a vulnerability approach to inform adaptation  decision making. He said adaptation is not a new issue, and needs  to be understood in the context of risk management. The  INTERNATIONAL STRATEGY ON DISASTER REDUCTION stressed links  between adaptation, and risk management and reduction. Noting that  the risk management community has many tools to offer, he  encouraged greater engagement between the adaptation and risk  management communities.

PANAMA highlighted a GEF regional adaptation project being  implemented in Central America, Mexico and Cuba, which aims to  assess current vulnerability to climate hazards through a process  involving all stakeholders. He said the final phase of the project  will present a number of specific adaptation options. CHINA said  development and transfer of technology play an important role in  adaptation. SAUDI ARABIA emphasized the importance of adaptation  to the impacts of response measures, and, with JAPAN and others,  stressed the value of exchanging information. FRANCE underlined  the importance of providing information to local decision makers.  Many countries noted the urgent need to take action. The COOK  ISLANDS underscored the need to address adaptation on a wider  scale and noted the difficulties that people in vulnerable  countries have in obtaining relevant insurance. SUDAN stated that,  as climate phenomena increase in intensity, adaptive abilities are  lost and therefore sustainable livelihood approaches are crucial.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

A number of delegates expressed surprise and confusion on Wednesday  over what they viewed as attempts to curtail discussions on the  Barbados Programme of Action on SIDS and the World Conference on  Disaster Reduction and to prevent conclusions on the issue before  discussions had taken place. Some delegates were also concerned  about talk of loosening rules on additionality in the discussion  on CDM, as this would undermine emissions reduction efforts by  developed countries. Others suggested that increased flexibility  is necessary to promote investment in developing countries.

On a more positive note, many participants were enthusiastic  regarding the afternoon in-session workshop on adaptation, noting  that the exchange of information and experiences highlighted the  urgency for taking action. Some expressed hope that the workshop  would catalyze the rumored 'action' on adaptation.