---
title: "SUMMARY OF THE FIRST CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES FOR THE FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE:: 28 MARCH -7 APRIL 1995"
id: 1221000e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/1221000e
date: 1995-04-07
abstract: "The first Conference of the Parties to the UN Framework  Convention on Climate Change (COP-1) met in Berlin from 28  March - 7 April 1995. In this historic city that was once  the symbol of the Cold War's divisions between East and  West, delegates from 117 Parties and 53 observer States  found that although the Berlin Wall has fallen, the walls  that divide the Parties to the Convention still remain. It  took seemingly endless hours of negotiations and  consultations before delegates with vastly different  priorities and concerns came to agreement on what many  believed to be the central issue before COP-1 - adequacy of  commitments. The result is a mandate to begin a process  toward appropriate action for the period beyond 2000,  including the strengthening of the commitments of Annex I  Parties in Article 4.2(a) and (b)."
---

Delegates also reached agreement on a number of other  important decisions, including the establishment of a pilot  phase for the implementation of joint projects, agreement  that the Permanent Secretariat should be located in Bonn,  and decisions on the budget for the Secretariat, financial  procedures and the establishment of the subsidiary bodies.  Delegates, however, did not reach consensus on the Rules of  Procedure. This critical issue, including a decision on the  voting rules and the composition of the Bureau, was deferred  until COP-2. While delegates accomplished much during the  two-week session that culminated with a two-day Ministerial  Segment, even the best 'diplomatic back-patting'could not  convince all delegates and observers that the first  Conference of the Parties was an unqualified success.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FCCC

Increasing scientific evidence about the possibility of  global climate change in the 1980s led to a growing  awareness that human activities have been contributing to  substantial increases in the atmospheric concentrations of  greenhouse gases. Concerned that anthropogenic increases of  emissions enhance the natural greenhouse effect and would  result, on average, in an additional warming of the Earth's  surface, the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the  United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) established the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in 1988.  The Panel focused on: assessing scientific information  related to the various aspects of climate change; evaluating  the environmental and socio-economic impacts of climate  change; and formulating response strategies. In 1990, the  finalization and adoption of the IPCC report and the Second  World Climate Conference focused further attention on  climate change.

## ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INC/FCCC

On 11 December 1990, the 45th session of the UN General  Assembly adopted a resolution that established the  Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee for a Framework  Convention on Climate Change (INC/FCCC). Supported by UNEP   and WMO, the mandate of the INC/FCCC was to prepare an  effective framework convention on climate change. The INC  held five sessions between February 1991 and May 1992.  During these meetings, participants from over 150 States  discussed the contentious issues of binding commitments,  targets and timetables for the reduction of carbon dioxide  emissions, financial mechanisms, technology transfer, and  'common but differentiated' responsibilities of developed  and developing countries. The INC sought to achieve a  consensus that could be supported by a broad majority,  rather than drafting a treaty that dealt with specific  policies that might limit participation.

## ADOPTION AND ENTRY INTO FORCE

The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  was adopted on 9 May 1992, and opened for signature at the  UN Conference on Environment and Development in June 1992 in  Rio, where it received 155 signatures. The Convention  entered into force on 21 March 1994 (90 days after the 50th  ratification).

After the adoption of the Convention, the INC met five more  times to consider the following items: matters relating to  commitments; matters relating to arrangements for the  financial mechanism and for technical and financial support  to developing countries; procedural and legal issues; and  institutional matters. During these INC sessions, scientific  work was done to improve the methodologies for measuring  emissions from various sources, but the larger scientific  problem was choosing the best methodology to estimate the  removal of carbon dioxide by 'sinks,' namely oceans and  forests. The other major task before negotiators was the  difficult issue of financial support for implementation,  particularly for developing country Parties who will require  'new and additional resources' to obtain data and implement  energy-efficient technologies and other necessary measures.

### INC-9

The INC held its ninth session from 7-18 February  1994, in Geneva. In discussions on matters relating to  commitments, delegates examined methodologies for  calculations/inventories of emissions and removal of  greenhouse gases, the first review of information  communicated by Annex I Parties, the role of the subsidiary  bodies established by the Convention, and criteria for joint  implementation. Delegates also reviewed the adequacy of  commitments. The need for broader action beyond the year  2000 on the commitments in Article 4.2(a) and (b) was  considered, based on the understanding that the provisions  of this article refer to the present decade.

In its discussions on matters relating to the financial  mechanism and technical and financial support to developing  country Parties, the Committee chose to focus on the  implementation of Article 11. It was agreed that only  developing countries that are Parties to the Convention  would be eligible to receive funding upon entry into force  of the Convention. There was general support for a cost- effective arrangement for the Permanent Secretariat  that  would encourage collaboration with other secretariats. The  question of the location of the Permanent Secretariat was  not resolved, but it was agreed that the Permanent  Secretariat will start operating on 1 January 1996, and, in  the interest of continuity, will be organized along the same  lines as the Interim Secretariat.

### INC-10

The tenth session of the INC was held from 22 August  - 2 September 1994, in Geneva. The Committee agreed on the  mechanisms for the first review of information communicated  by Annex I Parties. Some countries expressed the need for a  cautious approach to the review of adequacy of commitments,  since the scientific and technical assessments upon which  existing commitments are based were essentially unchanged.  Some countries also felt that the first meeting of the COP  would be a good occasion to make progress on the elaboration  of additional commitments. On the issue of joint  implementation, comments were invited on: objectives,  criteria and operational guidelines, functions and  institutional arrangements, and communication, review and  early experiences.

On matters related to the financial mechanism, countries  agreed to a stage-by-stage funding modality for adaptation  measures. The temporary arrangements between the Committee  and the Global Environment Facility (GEF) were also adopted.  On agreed full incremental costs, the Committee concluded  that this issue was complex and that further discussions  were needed. Delegates also concluded that the concept  should be flexible and applied on a case-by-case basis. The  Interim Secretariat was requested to prepare a paper on  transfer of technology and delegations were invited to  submit their views on this issue. On the subject of the  Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice  (SBSTA) and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI),  the provisional recommendation to the COP was that the SBSTA  will be the link between the scientific and technical  assessments and the information provided by international  bodies and the policy-oriented needs of the COP. The SBI  will develop recommendations to assist the COP in its  assessment and review of the implementation of the  Convention.

With regard to procedural and legal matters, the Committee  decided to continue its consideration of the draft Rules of  Procedure at its eleventh session. On institutional matters,  a contact group composed of five members of the Bureau, one  from each of the five regional groups, was established to  consider the various offers of governments and UN agencies  to host the Permanent Secretariat for the Convention and  make recommendations for the consideration of the Committee  at its eleventh session.

Subsequent to INC-10, Trinidad and Tobago, on behalf of the  Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS), submitted a draft  protocol to the Interim Secretariat. This protocol calls for  a reduction of emissions of greenhouse gases by 'at least  20% by the year 2005.'

### INC-11

The eleventh and final session of the INC met from   6-17 February 1995, at UN Headquarters in New York. During  the two-week session, delegates addressed a wide range of  issues including arrangements for the first session of the  COP, location of the Permanent Secretariat, Rules of  Procedure for the COP, matters relating to commitments,  matters relating to arrangements for the financial  mechanism, and provision of technical and financial support  to developing country Parties. While delegates did agree to  maintain the GEF as the interim entity operating the  financial mechanism and to finance mitigation activities,  little concrete progress was made on other important issues  before the Committee. Delegates were unable to take action  on the adequacy of commitments or to begin negotiations on a  draft protocol submitted by AOSIS or the proposals for  further elements of a protocol submitted by Germany. There  was no progress on joint implementation. Delegates had  little time to address technical and financial support to  developing countries. The location of the Permanent  Secretariat remained pending, although the four countries  offering to host the Secretariat (Canada, Germany,  Switzerland and Uruguay) were asked to negotiate among  themselves so that a single nomination would be presented to  the COP in Berlin. Finally, delegates were unable to reach  agreement on the Rules of Procedure due to lack of agreement  on voting procedures and the allocation of seats on the COP  Bureau.

# COP-1 REPORT

## OPENING PLENARY

COP-1 was opened on 28 April 1995, by the Executive- Secretary of the Interim Secretariat, Michael Zammit  Cutajar, who noted the need for Parties to shoulder the  responsibility of the Convention's effective implementation.  He said that INC-11 had recommended the election of the head  of the delegation of Germany, Dr. Angela Merkel, Federal  Minister for Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear  Safety, as President of COP-1.

After her election, Dr. Merkel said that the Spirit of Rio  would once again be needed in Berlin. Although climate  protection is one of the greatest political challenges, it  is imperative to act in accordance with the precautionary  principle. She said that COP-1 must decide if the  commitments of the industrialized countries were 'adequate'  to achieve the Convention's objectives, noting that the  obligations to date were not adequate. She said that the  process for a protocol must be set in motion. She hoped that  the framework for a pilot phase on joint implementation  could be created.

After hearing an opening statement on behalf of UN  Secretary- General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, delivered by  Under- Secretary-General Nitin Desai, the Plenary heard  other statements by: the Chair of the INC/FCCC, Rau'l  Estrada-Oyuela; the Secretary-General of the WMO, G.O.P.  Obasi; the Executive-Director of UNEP, Elizabeth Dowdeswell;  the Under-Secretary-General of DPCSD, Nitin Desai; the Chair  of the IPCC, Bert Bolin; and Michael Zammit Cutajar. The   Plenary then addressed a number of organizational matters,  including adoption of the agenda, as contained in document  FCCC/CP/1995/1.

Ratification Status: The President introduced document  FCCC/CP/1995/Inf.2, and noted that 127 States have ratified  the Convention. Laos and Jamaica will become Parties in  early April and may participate in discussions, but do not  have a vote.

Rules of Procedure: The President introduced  A/AC.237/L.22/Rev.2 and FCCC/CP/1995/2. She noted that  delegates had not reached consensus on all of the Rules of  Procedure and asked for their adoption by consensus during  this session. She stated there was broad agreement to  proceed under the draft rules and the COP could apply the  rules without formal adoption. The President announced that  she would conduct consultations to resolve outstanding  rules.

Election of Officers:  The President announced the following  nominations: Africa -Mauritania and Zimbabwe; Asia - India  and Japan; Eastern Europe - Hungary and the Russian  Federation; Latin America and the Caribbean - Antigua and  Barbuda and Argentina; Western Europe and Others - Australia  and Germany; and AOSIS - Samoa. It was also agreed that  Mauritania would be the Chair of the Subsidiary Body on  Implementation and Hungary would be the Chair of the  Subsidiary Body on Scientific and Technological Advice.  Kuwait and Saudi Arabia expressed difficulty with Rule 22 on  composition of the Bureau. They asked if the nominations  were still open, and added that they had asked for OPEC  country representation on the Bureau. The President said the  COP would apply the Rules of Procedure, but there will still  be negotiations on outstanding questions.

Admission of organizations as observers: Document  FCCC/CP/1995/3, which contains the list of intergovernmental  and non-governmental organizations endorsed by INC-11 (Annex  I) and an additional list of organizations wishing to be  observers at COP-1 (Annex II), was accepted.

Organization of work: The President noted that the work was  organized in two parts: an initial negotiating segment  followed by a Ministerial Segment from 5-7 April. She hoped  that the sessions of the Committee of the Whole (COW) would  not seek to reopen resolved issues but would work on  outstanding issues. Amb. Rau'l Estrada-Oyuela was designated  as Chair of the COW. The COW was asked to deal with the  items where consensus was not reached at INC-11.  Consequently, all other decisions recommended by the INC-11  for consideration by COP-1 were referred directly to the  Plenary.

## OTHER PLENARY MEETINGS

The Plenary met several times to hear statements and receive  progress reports on the work of the Committee of the Whole.  The second meeting of the Plenary took place on Thursday, 30  March 1995. Delegates heard statements from: UNDP  Administrator James Gustave Speth, representatives from the  governments of South Africa and Ukraine, and representatives   from UNIDO, UNESCO, the International Oceanographic  Commission, the Convention to Combat Desertification, the  Economic Commission for Europe, the International Energy  Agency, the South Pacific Regional Environment Programme,  the Second Municipal Leaders' Summit on Climate Change,  Climate Action Network (Pacific) and the International  Chamber of Commerce.

On Monday, 3 April 1995, the Plenary heard statements from  Klaus T'pfer, Chair of the UN Commission on Sustainable  Development, and Mohamed El-Ashry, CEO and Chair of the  Global Environment Facility. Other statements were delivered  by representatives of Israel, the World Bank, the East Asia  & Pacific Parliamentarians' Conference on Environment and  Development, Global Legislators for a Balanced Environment,  and Climate is Ripe for a Change (international youth  campaign).

## COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE

On Tuesday afternoon, 28 March 1995, the Committee of the  Whole (COW) began its work. The newly elected Chair, Amb.  Estrada, reminded delegates that the Plenary has asked the  COW to consider the following five items: review of adequacy  of Article 4.2(a) and (b), including proposals relating to a  protocol and decisions on follow-up; criteria for joint  implementation; roles of the subsidiary bodies established  by the Convention, including their programmes of work and  calendars of meetings; guidance on programme priorities,  eligibility criteria and policies, and on the determination  of 'agreed full incremental costs;' and designation of a  Permanent Secretariat and arrangements for its functioning,  including budget and physical location.

During the course of the COP-1, the COW considered each of  the items in a general debate and then established small  consulting or drafting groups to work out the details for  each decision. The following is a summary of the  consideration of these items.

REVIEW OF THE ADEQUACY OF THE COMMITMENTS IN ARTICLE 4.2(a)  AND (b): The COW considered the adequacy of commitments on  Wednesday and Thursday, 29 and 30 March 1995. The  Secretariat noted that INC-11 had agreed that present  commitments are only a first step toward meeting Convention  goals, and that the COP should take appropriate action based  on this review. He noted the AOSIS protocol is contained in  A/AC.237/L.23 and the German elements paper is  A/AC.237/L.23/Add.1.

The Philippines, on behalf of the G-77 and China, said that  implementation of current commitments should be the COP's  chief concern. Responsibility should not shift from Annex I  to non-Annex I Parties. He called for further discussion of  a protocol. India endorsed the G-77 and China's statement  and expressed concern about certain parts of the AOSIS  proposal. Supported by Indonesia, he stressed the need for a  protocol that imposes commitments only on Annex I Parties.  Sri Lanka said developing countries should not have to share  new commitments.

Samoa, on behalf of AOSIS, and supported by Fiji, Mauritius,   Micronesia, Papua New Guinea, Norway and the Republic of  Korea, called for adoption of the AOSIS protocol. He said  the AOSIS States proposed the draft protocol because they  are being hit first and hardest by climate change that they  are not responsible for, adding that continuing emissions at  present levels would be a disaster for all. He summarized  the main features of the AOSIS protocol: an additional  commitment that developed countries reduce CO2 emissions by  2005 to 20% below 1990 levels; no additional commitments for  developing countries; a comprehensive approach to other  greenhouse gases in a phased manner; and a coordination  mechanism for cooperation on economic, administrative and  other implementation measures. Antigua and Barbuda said  island States view sea level rise as the primary threat. The  AOSIS protocol takes a universal view rather than narrowly  confining its approach to the views of those living on large  continental shelves. Bangladesh said there must be a  definite commitment to reduce CO2 emissions beyond 2000 and  any country that exceeds the identified standard should be  subject to some form of emissions tax.

France, on behalf of the EU, and supported by Poland and  Hungary, urged COP-1 to map out a protocol mandate, which  would establish an open-ended ad hoc working group, require  a report for COP-2 and set guidelines for conclusions.

The Netherlands said that it would be irresponsible to  postpone further action. Industrialized countries should  significantly reduce their emissions. The COP should agree  on a mandate and guidance for negotiating a protocol to be  adopted in 1997. Germany said an immediate framework for  reductions is an urgent requirement. Delegates should adopt  a clear mandate as a starting point for protocol  negotiations. He added that only if industrialized countries  agreed to reductions could other States be expected to take  on commitments at an  appropriate time. Switzerland said  Parties should prepare a protocol by 1997. She called for an  ad hoc working group to conduct negotiations, adopt a  mandate and schedule, and take a coordinated and cooperative  approach to reductions. Norway advocated joint targets for  OECD countries based on equitable sharing of responsibility.

The Czech Republic and Argentina supported negotiations on a  draft protocol that should use the AOSIS protocol and the  German elements paper as a starting point. Slovakia said  negotiations on a protocol should conclude in 1997-98.  Uruguay endorsed charting a course on a protocol and  establishing a working group at COP-2, including oil  producing countries.

Mauritania said a universal negotiation process should be  established within the COP and not in a subsidiary body.

The US said that a drafting group should work on a mandate  to begin a negotiating process within the SBI, with the  SBSTA working on an assessment for limiting greenhouse gases  (GHGs).

New Zealand said that a clear mandate was critical for COP-1   since current commitments are not adequate, and called for a  cooperative approach based on common but differentiated  responsibilities. The mandate should include: work towards a  protocol under the SBI with a legally-binding instrument in  1997; the inclusion of all GHGs; action for the post-2000  period; reduction efforts led by developed countries and  those developing countries contributing most to emissions;  and the creation of a business consultative mechanism.  Australia called for clear guidelines for the negotiations  of a protocol that must not limit action to one group of  countries, but should involve action by all Parties within  the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities.

Brazil said delegates should not prejudge the mechanisms for  perfecting implementation of the Convention, which could  include the drafting of a new instrument, a protocol, other  measures and means, timetables and targets, or some  combination of these. He said developing countries' right to  development should not be compromised, and that trying to  enroll developing countries in a hasty manner or by making  linkages with joint implementation would not solve any  problems.

China said a majority of States is not yet ready to  negotiate a protocol. Full implementation of existing  commitments is an essential step for Annex I Parties. China  cannot accept the creation of new categories of countries  and thought it inappropriate for developing county Parties  to undertake new commitments. Algeria, on behalf of the  African Group, said in light of the Convention's principles  of common but differentiated responsibilities, the polluter  pays and the right to development, African countries are not  willing to accept any new commitments.

The Russian Federation stated that the AOSIS proposal lacks  significant scientific basis. Thailand said the decision to  negotiate a protocol should only be taken after the release  of the second IPCC assessment report. Saudi Arabia said that  although its approach and concerns are different, it is not  blocking progress. Saudi Arabia expressed concern that it  would be affected economically by the different measures to  reduce consumption of fossil fuels, particularly oil. He  said that the COP should not take hasty steps, but should  wait for the IPCC's second assessment report.

Kuwait quoted from the report of IPCC's Working Group III  that emissions scenarios are not appropriate inputs to  negotiation of possible emission reductions. He said that it  was premature to draft a protocol when Annex I Parties have  not met current commitments. Iran said that full  implementation of commitments by Annex I Parties must be the  first priority. A decision on inadequacy of commitments  should wait until the release of the IPCC's second  assessment report.

Venezuela emphasized that Parties must honor existing  commitments before pursuing a protocol. Nigeria faces triple  vulnerability: environmental impacts of climate change, the  socioeconomic aspects of climate policy, and an economy   dependent on oil revenue. Additional burdens are  unacceptable.

The UK observed that some delegations have drawn attention  to scientific uncertainty, but warned against  underestimating what is already known. Commitments that only  go to 2000 are inadequate, and are not reason enough to  avoid setting a new time-frame.

After hearing these initial statements, the Chair asked Amb.  Bo Kjelle'n (Sweden) to convene consultations on the  adequacy of commitments. The consultative group met for the  first time on Friday morning, 31 March 1995, with a  standing-room-only crowd. Although the large number of  delegates was not conducive to drafting, delegates were able  to further exchange views on possible elements of a mandate  for further consultations on the adequacy of commitments.  Consultations resumed Friday afternoon, but by the end of  the day it was clear that no progress could be made. The  Chair requested that the G-77 and China meet to reconsider  their position and report back at the next meeting.

The G-77 and China met Saturday afternoon to discuss their  position. India tabled a draft decision setting forth the  principles to guide consultations on strengthening the  commitments of Annex I Parties in Article 4.2(a) and (b) and  how the consultations should be conducted. When the G-77  appeared to be deadlocked, it was proposed that the G-77  meeting adjourn and that a meeting of 'like minded States'  (developing countries minus the oil-producing States)  convene in its place. Kjelle'n's group reconvened Saturday  evening and India, on behalf of 72 developing States - also  referred to as the 'Green Group' - tabled its proposed  elements of a mandate for consultations on commitments. On  Sunday afternoon, delegates agreed to base further  negotiations on the paper produced by the Green Group.

Consultations reconvened Monday, 3 April 1995. The EU  distributed its comments on the paper produced by the Green  Group. The consultations adjourned so that the G-77 could  review the EU comments. Amb. Kjelle'n also requested that  the various groups select representatives so that a group of  24 'Friends of the Chair' could convene that evening to  begin negotiations. This group of 'Friends' consisted of  four members of the EU, four other OECD country  representatives, two OPEC countries, two Eastern European  countries, and delegates from the Green Group. Some of the  main issues in the discussion were: commitments for  developing country Parties; setting specific and legally- binding reduction targets (e.g. the Toronto Target) within  specified time-frames; combining a reduction target for  Annex I Parties with measures such as transfer of financial  resources and technology to developing countries; and the  target date for completion of the negotiations.

Negotiations on the elements of a mandate continued  throughout the day and night Tuesday and Wednesday. Some  participants commented that there had been progress toward  agreement on a mandate to negotiate or consult on a protocol  to be adopted by 1997. The question that remained when the   group adjourned Wednesday night was how forward-looking this  mandate would be.

After meeting throughout the day on Thursday with little  success, delegates asked their ministers to joint the  consultations.  The final outstanding issues included  language on the goals of the next phase of negotiations on  commitments, whether 'targets' would be mentioned, and how  the decision would treat the commitments of non-Annex I  Parties. A final negotiating session began at 11:00 pm,  under the leadership of COP President Angela Merkel. In the  early morning hours on Friday, the ministerial meeting  adjourned and delegates, accompanied by a few ministers,  separated into two rooms - one room for developing country  ministers and delegates and one room for OECD ministers and  delegates. Merkel conducted 'shuttle diplomacy' between the  two groups until agreement was reached at 6:00 am.

The document adopted during the final session of the  Plenary, FCCC/CP/1995/L.14, agrees to begin a process to  enable the COP to take appropriate action for the period  beyond 2000, including the strengthening of the commitments  of Annex I Parties in Article 4, paragraph 2(a) and (b),  through the adoption of a protocol or another legal  instrument. The process shall be guided by the legitimate  needs of developing countries for sustained economic growth  and the right to promote sustainable development; the widest  possible cooperation by all countries, in accordance with  their common but differentiated responsibilities and  respective capabilities and their social and economic  conditions; and coverage of all GHGs, their emissions by  sources and removal by sinks in all relevant sectors. The  process will aim for Annex I Parties to elaborate policies  and measures, and set quantified limitation and reduction  objectives within specified time-frames, such as 2005, 2010  and 2020, for anthropogenic emissions by sources and removal  by sinks of GHGs not controlled by the Montreal Protocol.  The process takes into account differences in starting  points and approaches, economic structures and resource  bases, the need to maintain economic growth, available  technology and other individual circumstances, the need for  equitable and appropriate contribution by these Parties to  the global effort, and a process of assessment and analysis  laid out in the decision.

The process will not introduce any new commitments for  Parties not included in Annex I, but reaffirms existing  commitments in Article 4.1 and continues to advance the  implementation of these commitments. The process will be  carried out in light of the best available scientific  information, including the IPCC and other available  expertise. The AOSIS draft protocol, along with other  proposals and pertinent documents, will be included for  consideration in the process. The process should begin  without delay and be conducted in an open-ended ad hoc group  of Parties that will report to COP-2 on progress. The  group's sessions should be scheduled to ensure completion of  the work as early as possible in 1997 with a  view to  adopting the results at COP-3.

### CRITERIA FOR JOINT IMPLEMENTATION

The COW formally  considered joint implementation (JI) on Thursday, 30 March  1995. The Chair introduced document A/AC.237/91/Add.1, which  contains the text of proposals tabled at INC-11 by the G-77  and China, the EU and the US.

The Philippines, on behalf of the G-77 and China, reiterated  points contained in their proposal, including the  application of emission limits to only Annex I Parties and  the distinction between joint activities and joint  implementation. Colombia said that developing countries  should not assume the same obligations as developed  countries. JI should be differentiated from the transfer of  technology and financial resources.

Bangladesh said single-country initiatives should not be  crowded out or overshadowed by JI. Indonesia said that joint  activities between developed and developing countries should  be based on national priorities of the recipient country and  facilitate the transfer of technology and financial  resources. China expressed confusion over tradable rights  and other new ideas. Emission reductions should only apply  to developed countries. The provision of financial resources  for JI projects should not be counted as support for  developing country Parties.

Brazil strongly opposed JI and added that his delegation did  not want to exchange 'smoke for trees.' India said a pilot  phase could be launched if no credits were allocated. JI  should also be voluntary, bilateral and directly related to  national development priorities. Algeria, on behalf of the  African States, said that JI can only be undertaken by  Parties with the same obligations and responsibilities. JI  should be approached on an experimental basis using pilot  voluntary activities fully financed by Annex I Parties. Mali  said that a JI pilot phase should be extended to cover  developing countries, but developed countries should not  assume a reduction of their commitments.

Canada supported a phased JI approach as a mechanism to  encourage private sector capital and increase access to  technology. JI participation does not impose new obligations  on developing countries. Fiji supported a pilot phase to  help the COP set firm criteria. Kuwait said that any  amendment of the G-77 and China proposal would involve the  danger of transferring Annex I Parties' commitments to other  countries. He supported initiating a pilot phase in  accordance with the G-77 criteria.

Chile said clear criteria should address the percentage of  reductions of developed countries produced through projects  in developing countries, with controls to prevent developed  countries from escaping their commitments. JI could be  linked with new commitments from developed countries as an  item the developing countries could offer. Poland supported  initiatives to address emissions targets at lowest cost and  to create opportunities to negotiate stronger commitments.  Costa Rica and the Czech Republic said JI provides a role  for the private sector. Argentina called for clear   instructions for a pilot phase that will do away with  skepticism. Belize agreed with Costa Rica and Chile. There  should be a pilot phase open to non-Annex I Parties.

Germany said that JI may be beneficial for developing  countries since cooperative measures may improve access to  technologies, trigger investments, and involve an exchange  of experience and knowledge. He supported the pilot phase.  France, on behalf of the EU, called for a pilot phase that  is transparent, well-defined and credible, with no credits  for Annex I Parties. JI should not be used to impose new  commitments on non-Annex I Parties.

The Russian Federation said COP-1 should adopt criteria for  JI and called for equality of participation by all Parties.  Peru said that COP-1 should provide criteria for JI. He  called for a pilot phase that accommodates national  development plans.

New Zealand said that JI is a means for limiting GHGs,  assisting technology transfer and promoting sustainable  development. He called for the establishment of a pilot  phase without credits designed to evaluate criteria and  crediting issues. The US said JI has enormous potential to  improve flows of environmentally sound technologies between  countries and provide cost-effective ways of reduce global  emissions. Japan supported a JI pilot phase without credits,  and added that JI activities should be voluntary,  transparent, open to all Parties, financed independently of  existing ODA and provide for technology transfer.

Australia said that COP-1 should initiate a JI pilot phase  with participation open to all Parties. JI should not be  used as a means for avoiding commitments, and crediting  should be addressed after a review of the pilot phase in  1998.

Switzerland said the COP should request the SBI to: evaluate  pilot phase projects; verify information communicated; and  make recommendations for the post-pilot phase period.  Cameroon said supporting a pilot phase appears to endorse a  structure that no one really knows anything about. The  Republic of Korea said all interested Parties should go  ahead and show the rest of the world the results.

The Chair said that COP-1 had to take decisions on criteria  for JI implementation and that he would engage in further  consultations on this matter. Over the next four days, the  G-77 and China drafted their own decision on joint  implementation for consideration by the COW. On Tuesday, 4  April 1995, Estrada noted that there had been progress and  that the time was ripe for consultations between groups. He  proposed that Mahmoud Ould El Ghaouth (Mauritania)  coordinate these consultations.

The consultations began Tuesday evening with approximately  30 delegates working from the G-77 draft decision and the EU  and US papers from INC-11. The consultations lasted until  6:30 am Wednesday. With the exception of credits, there  appeared to be agreement on text to establish a JI pilot  phase. Delegates agreed to change the name and refer to  'projects implemented jointly' rather than 'joint   implementation' to imply that there is still no acceptance  on the criteria for JI. Throughout the day Wednesday, small  groups of delegates met in the corridors trying to reach  agreement on the question of credits, the length of the  pilot phase and under which articles of the Convention can  implementation of joint projects be undertaken. Towards the  end of the day, the US said that it could not indicate its  acceptance of the emerging compromise until Thursday  morning.

On Thursday, the consultative group reconvened and after a  few countries tried to re-open previously agreed upon  language, the group reached consensus on the text. On  Thursday night the COW adopted FCCC/CP/1995/L.13 on  activities implemented jointly under the pilot phase. Brazil  noted that it had made major concessions, and that the COP  should look carefully at activities implemented jointly  whenever they involve Annex I and non-Annex I countries.  Claiming credit for cooperation is something that runs the  risk of destroying the concept that countries are  responsible for their national emissions.

The final text establishes a pilot phase for activities  implemented jointly among Annex I Parties and, on a  voluntary basis, with non-Annex I Parties that so request.  Activities implemented jointly should be compatible with and  supportive of national environment and development  priorities and strategies, contribute to cost-effectiveness  in achieving global benefits and be conducted in a  comprehensive manner covering all relevant sources, sinks  and reservoirs of greenhouse gases.

Activities implemented jointly should bring about real,  measurable and long-term environmental benefits related to  the mitigation of climate change that would not have  occurred in the absence of such activities. The financing of  such activities shall be additional to the financial  obligations of Annex II Parties and current ODA flows. No  credits shall accrue to any Party as a result of GHG  emissions reduced or sequestered during the pilot phase.

The SBSTA and SBI will establish a framework for reporting  on the possible global benefits, the national economic,  social and environmental impacts, and experience gained or  difficulties encountered. The subsidiary bodies will prepare  a synthesis report for consideration by the COP. A  comprehensive review of the pilot phase will take place no  later than the end of the present decade to decide on the  pilot phase and the subsequent activities.

### ROLES OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES ESTABLISHED BY THE  CONVENTION, INCLUDING THEIR PROGRAMMES OF WORK AND CALENDARS  OF MEETINGS

The COW considered INC-11 Recommendation 8 on  subsidiary bodies contained in document A/AC.237/91/Add.1 on  Friday, 31 March 1995. Benin asked whether the Subsidiary  Body for Implementation (SBI) and the Subsidiary Body for  Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) would meet at  the same time.  The Chair clarified that the subsidiary  bodies would meet one after the other. The COW agreed to  recommend to the Plenary that the subsidiary bodies should   meet in Geneva at the following times: first session -  October 1995; intergovernmental technical advisory panels  and workshop on non-governmental inputs - January 1996;  second session - mid-February 1996; intergovernmental  technical advisory panels - April 1996; and third session -  July 1996. The COW agreed to recommend COP-1 to authorize  the subsidiary bodies to establish intergovernmental  technical panels subject to confirmation by COP-2.

The COW also agreed to recommend to COP-1 that in the first  year, the organization of workshops would depend on the host  governments and that facilities for hosting these workshops  would have to come from sources external to the Secretariat  budget. Additionally, the Committee agreed to recommend that  the subsidiary bodies' bureaus would make a proposal to COP- 2 on the relationship between the subsidiary bodies and the  IPCC. The Chair suggested that on matters regarding review  and synthesis of national communications, the subsidiary  bodies' bureaus could submit a proposal providing guidance  to COP-2. The US and Benin said that any such proposal  should be reviewed by the full membership of both subsidiary  bodies. The COW agreed to recommend this formulation to the  Plenary. Uruguay asked about the relationship between these  subsidiary bodies and other relevant UN organizations and  Conventions. The Chair clarified that in all meetings of the  COP and its subsidiary bodies, all organizations and  Convention Secretariats who wish to attend may do so.

On Monday, 3 April 1995, Estrada introduced document  FCCC/CP/1995/L.5 on the Roles of Subsidiary Bodies. He  directed delegates' attention to four sections: paragraph 3,  authorizing the SBSTA to establish two intergovernmental  advisory panels subject to confirmation at COP-2; paragraph  6, inviting officers of the subsidiary bodies to submit  proposals to COP-2 for their future cooperation with the  IPCC; paragraph 9, directing the Secretariat to arrange  three subsequent sessions for the subsidiary bodies; and  paragraph 10, recommending that workshops and other events  that are not budgeted be funded by the host country or other  governments. L.5 was recommended for adoption by the COP.

It was later agreed by the Plenary that the SBSTA bureau  would consist of Hungary as Chair, Mauritius as Vice Chair  and Uzbekistan as Rapporteur. The SBI bureau is chaired by  Mauritania, with the Netherlands as Vice Chair and Peru as  Rapporteur.

### FINANCIAL MECHANISM

On Thursday, 30 March 1995, the COW  considered the report of the GEF to the COP  (FCCC/CP/1995/4). The Secretariat introduced the document  and noted that the report was divided into two sections, the  development of an operational strategy and the initial  activities undertaken by the GEF, including enabling  activities for national communications and projects. The  first section describes a two track approach. COP-1 may  adopt a strategy of maximizing short-term cost  effectiveness, long-term cost effectiveness, or a mixed  strategy of short- and long-term priorities. The second   section describes the initial activities undertaken by the  GEF on climate change. The Chair noted that COP-1 had to  decide between the various approaches described and that he  would hold consultations on these matters.

On Friday, 31 March 1995, the Chair introduced document  FCCC/CP/1995/L.1, a draft decision on the report of the GEF  to the COP on the development of an operational strategy and  on initial activities in the field of climate change. The  Committee agreed to recommend that the COP adopt this  decision, which accepts the GEF Council's two-track approach  in 1995. Under track one, the GEF Secretariat will work to  develop a long-term comprehensive operational strategy, and  under track two, some project activities will be undertaken  to allow a smooth transition between the pilot phase and the  restructured GEF. The decision also includes a 'mixed  strategy' wherein projects will be selected on the basis of  either long-term or short-term programme priorities.

### DESIGNATION OF THE PERMANENT SECRETARIAT AND ARRANGEMENTS  FOR ITS FUNCTIONING

On Tuesday, 28 March 1995, Executive- Secretary Michael Zammit Cutajar introduced the  documentation on designation of a Permanent Secretariat and  arrangements for its functioning (FCCC/CP/1995/5 and its  three addenda). He gave particular attention to the  following five areas where action is needed by the COP:  institutional linkages between the Convention Secretariat  and the United Nations; financial procedures; physical  location of the Convention Secretariat; the Convention  budget for the biennium 1996-1997; and extrabudgetary  funding for 1995.

Uruguay said the Interim Secretariat's budget estimates did  not reflect differences in potential operating costs based  on the proposals for the location of the Permanent  Secretariat, which should be taken into account. He  suggested that the estimates include more than the transfer  costs of locating the Permanent Secretariat, and added that  he could not support the sections on Uruguay in the Interim  Secretariat's documents. India was willing to adopt the  indicative scale of contributions outlined in the Interim  Secretariat's document and asked whether proposed  consultations had occurred between the countries offering to  host the Permanent Secretariat. Canada said the budget  figures Uruguay mentioned had not been distributed, but  should be as soon as possible.

The Executive-Secretary responded that the cost figures  referred to by Uruguay appeared only in a draft document and  could be improved upon in any final document. Comparisons by  location of staff costs, the major element of Secretariat  expenses, were based on standard UN figures, not surveys of  local costs. He said he had not been informed of any  consultations between countries proposing to host the  Permanent Secretariat. He also noted that  FCCC/CP/1995/Misc.3, a letter from Canada, was the only new  information received since INC-11. At the conclusion of the  discussion, the Chair announced that a drafting group,  chaired by Mahmoud Ould El Ghaouth (Mauritania)  would be   formed to consider the budget.

Budget: The drafting group on the budget met several times  during the first week before beginning a programme-by- programme review of the budget on Friday evening. During the  two-hour meeting, some OECD countries called for reductions  in the budget and asked the Secretariat to provide the group  with new figures on Saturday evening. The drafting group  completed the first phase of its work on Monday, 4 April  1995. When El Ghaouth presented the draft decision documents  to the COW the following day, he noted that some of the  figures would have to be changed once the location of the  Permanent Secretariat was known. The COW then recommended  the following draft decisions for adoption by COP-1: the  Convention budget for the biennium 1996-1997  (FCCC/CP/1995/L.4); Extrabudgetary funding for the interim  secretariat for 1995 (FCCC/CP/1995/L.7); and Other voluntary  funding for the biennium 1996-1997 (FCCC/CP/1995/L.8). At  the suggestion of France, a footnote was added to L.4  explaining that the working capital reserve amounted to 8.3%  of the operating budget, equivalent to one month's budget.

Once the decision was taken to move the Secretariat to Bonn,  the drafting group on the budget met once again to revise  certain figures. Although the Executive-Secretary of the  Interim Secretariat noted that some costs would only be  determined after further consultations with the German  Government, the COP approved the Convention budget for the  biennium 1996-1997, amounting to US$18,664,200.

Financial Procedures: On Friday, 31 March 1995, the Chair  introduced FCCC/CP/1995/L.2, a draft decision on financial  procedures for the Permanent Secretariat. The Chair also  introduced document FCCC/CP/1995/ 5/Add.1/Rev.1, containing  the indicative scale of contributions from Parties to the  administrative budget. Delegations then asked specific  questions regarding the computation of contributions and  percentages. Mauritania raised the possibility of annexing  the financial rules to the proposed text. Uruguay asked  whether the COP would recommend suspending voting rights for  Parties that do not meet their contributions. The Chair said  there are no sanctions mentioned in the basic documents for  non-payment of contributions. Japan joined the consensus on  contributions, but added that his delegation interprets  these contributions as voluntary. The Committee then agreed  to recommend the adoption of L.2 to the Plenary.

FCCC/CP/1995/L.2/Rev.1, which was adopted by the Plenary at  its final session, also includes a full text of the  financial procedures for the COP, its subsidiary bodies and  the secretariat in Annex I and the indicative scale of  contributions to the administrative budget of the Convention  for the biennium 1996-1997 in Annex II. It also decides that  any countries becoming Parties during the remainder of 1995  shall contribute to the expenses of the Convention, and  requests that all Parties be advised of their contributions  no later than 22 December 1995.

Institutional Linkages: On Saturday, 1 April 1995, the Chair  introduced FCCC/CP/1995/L.3 on the institutional linkages   between the Permanent Secretariat and the United Nations. He  summarized the decision's substantive provisions including  that the Secretariat be linked but not fully integrated with  UN programmes, the arrangement be reviewed by 31 December  1999, a request that the General Assembly pay conference- servicing costs for future COPs and meetings of subsidiary  bodies from the UN regular programme budget, and that the  Interim Secretariat inform the Secretary-General of the  estimated financial implications for 1996 and 1997. The  document, which was later amended to reflect recommendations  received from the UN Secretary-General, was forwarded for  adoption by the Plenary.

Location of the Permanent Secretariat: Amb. Estrada held  consultations on the location of the Permanent Secretariat  during the first week of COP-1. On Monday, 3 April 1995,  Estrada reported that no consensus was yet apparent. Various  means had been considered, including an informal  confidential survey of delegations' preferences by secret  ballot. He said the original agreement was that a decision  would be taken at Berlin and preferably prior to the  ministerial session, but one of the four candidate  delegations disagreed. He said he recognized that the  general feeling of the house was to take a decision at COP- 1. Canada said its understanding was that there is no  consensus on this point. The Chair said he would wait for  Canada to support his proposal.

On Tuesday, Estrada proposed an 'informal survey' where each  Party would indicate its preference on a piece of paper  prepared for this purpose and place this paper in a box. Any  paper with more than one mark or no marks would be  considered invalid. If one city received the 'absolute  majority' it would be proposed for a consensus solution. If  not, there would be a second round with three cities and, if  necessary, a third round with two cities. Estrada then noted  that budget implications and the need to establish a  Secretariat without doubts about administrative arrangements  made a decision imperative.

Canada disagreed that this was the appropriate time to  decide. He said that INC-11's intent was for COP-1 to select  a candidate city only if there was consensus. He urged  delegates to consider using the survey later at a neutral  site. Switzerland said it was not the time politically to  pursue these consultations and that it would also be a bad  UN precedent. The decision should be made on neutral ground,  possibly at the CSD meeting in New York. The US said he was  persuaded by the Canadian and Swiss concerns.

Italy, supported by Poland, said he was impressed by the  Chair's suggestion, and that Article 8.3 of the Convention  says COP-1 should designate a Permanent Secretariat. Germany  said now is an appropriate time to take a decision. Nigeria,  Costa Rica, Ethiopia, Mali, Trinidad and Tobago, Togo, Cape  Verde, Niger, Mauritius and Djibouti supported the Chair's  proposal. Burkina Faso said that COP-1 should take the  decision, but the question should be put before the  Ministerial Segment.

 Canada said Article 8.3 did not require COP-1 to decide on  the location. He called for a substantive discussion,  including budget figures comparing costs for the four  locations. The Chair said the figures had been presented in  consultations on the Convention budget, and participating  delegations have had an opportunity to review them. The  Chair said deferring the decision by a few weeks would be  expensive and complicated. He said it was the feeling of the  house that delegates should proceed, notwithstanding the  reluctance of two candidates and some other delegations. He  emphasized that the survey was not a decision or a vote.

Canada said that regardless of what it was called, the Chair  was proposing a decision mechanism by majority vote. Canada  noted his country's offer to contribute an additional $1  million (Canadian) for five years to the Secretariat budget.  Canada also distributed budget figures for staff and travel  that showed Toronto costs to be 54% of Geneva, 67% of  Montevideo and 70% of Bonn for 1996-1997. Switzerland said  he was pleased to see his supporters backing a quick  decision and that there was progress on the Chair's  proposal. The US said it would not hold up progress. Uruguay  agreed that a decision should be made at Berlin.

The first round of the survey was completed at 4:00 pm on  Tuesday. No city received a majority and Uruguay withdrew  its offer to host the Secretariat in Montevideo. The second  round of the survey was completed at 7:00 pm that evening.  When all of the secret ballots were counted there was still  no majority and Estrada announced that the third round would  take place on Wednesday and the choice would be between Bonn  and Geneva. Canada then withdrew its offer to host the  Secretariat in Toronto. On Wednesday afternoon the tension  built and the press gathered. Finally, Estrada announced  that the Parties participating in the informal survey had  selected Bonn as the seat of the Permanent Secretariat. The  COW adopted decision FCCC/CP/1995/L.12 on the location of  the Permanent Secretariat in Bonn on Thursday night, 6 April  1995.

### TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY

On Friday, 31 March 1995, the  Philippines, on behalf of the G-77 and China, introduced a  draft decision on technology transfer that asked the  Secretariat to compile an itemized report on technology  transfer activities of Annex II Parties, directed the  Secretariat to prepare an inventory of potentially  transferable technologies, and requested that all measures  be reviewed and evaluated at subsequent COPs.

The Chair asked the G-77 and other delegations to consult  among themselves and report back to the COW. On Tuesday, the  G-77 and China's revised draft decision on technology  transfer was distributed. The Republic of Korea, on behalf  of the G-77 and China, noted that after consultations with  other groups only three sets of brackets remained in the  document. During the discussion that followed, the Chair  tried to facilitate consensus on the remaining bracketed  text. The US, supported by New Zealand, thought further  substantive discussion was necessary. He asked if this   decision had to set the agendas for all future COPs in  paragraph 3(a) and who would provide the advice to improve  the operational modalities for the effective transfer of  technology in paragraph 3(b). Nevertheless, the Chair noted  that the discussion must come to an end, closed the debate  and suggested that the Committee adopt the text, as orally  amended. Despite protestations by the US that its concerns  had not been addressed, the Chair gavelled this matter to a  close. The COW formally adopted the text of  FCCC/CP/1995/L.10 on Thursday night, 6 April 1995.

## MINISTERIAL SEGMENT

The Ministerial Segment opened on Wednesday, 5 April 1995,  and included statements from 96 ministers and other heads of  delegations. Dr. Helmut Kohl, Chancellor of the Federal  Republic of Germany, urged delegates to remember the lessons  of the Berlin, noting that never again must 'walls of  enmity' be erected between peoples, nations and States. He  stated that the Rio Conference provided a clear signal of  hope but the recent recession shows that sustainable  development does not sufficiently determine the actions of  States. He stressed three central issues: industrialized  country responsibility to limit CO2 emissions permanently  beyond the year 2000; a negotiation mandate from this  Conference for a noticeable reduction in GHG emissions after  2000; and agreement on joint implementation to facilitate  the transfer of  technology.

During the two days of the Ministerial Segment, most  developing States agreed on matters such as no new  commitments for developing States, financial assistance and  technology transfer. However, there were many different  views on the consequences of action, or inaction, on climate  change. Small island developing States, such as Papua New  Guinea, the Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands, Samoa,  Vanuatu, Micronesia, Mauritius, Jamaica and the Maldives,  emphasized their vulnerability to the effects of climate  change, particularly sea level rise. Since many small island  States are only a few meters above sea level, they called  for immediate adoption of the AOSIS protocol. Many African  States, including Botswana, Nigeria, Chad, Cote d'Ivoire,  Benin, Lesotho, The Gambia, Guinea Bissau, Mauritania,  Senegal, Tunisia, Togo, Mozambique, Morocco and the Central  African Republic, stressed the link between climate change  and other problems, such as desertification and extreme  poverty, and called for technology transfer and financial  assistance. Most South American countries supported emission  reductions for developed countries and the need for  technology transfer, but joint implementation caused a rift,  with Chile, Costa Rica, Venezuela, Argentina, Bolivia,  Uruguay and Peru in favor and Brazil against.

Countries with economies in transition, including Croatia,  Slovenia, Bulgaria, Hungary, Slovakia, Poland, Romania,  Latvia, Estonia, the Czech Republic and the Russian  Federation, cited the need to integrate new technologies  into their inefficient industrial sectors and stated that  they would lower emissions as much as possible given their   weak economies. Most Asian countries, including the  Philippines, Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, Mongolia,  Pakistan, Sri Lanka and Nepal, focused on the inadequate  obligations of Annex I Parties and provision of financial  resources and called for adoption of the 'Green Paper.'  India and Bangladesh cited their environmental vulnerability  and recent natural disasters as reason for immediate action  on a protocol.

Oil-producing developing countries said the Conference  should not rush forward but should base its action on solid  scientific information. Kuwait expressed concern about the  economic and social impacts of lowered emissions, and Saudi  Arabia said that considering emission reductions impeded the  progress of the Convention and overlooked possible positive  effects of climate change on agriculture.

Developed countries agreed that the current commitments for  Annex I Parties were inadequate but not on the extent to  which they should be strengthened. The EU, Denmark, Austria,  Finland, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Liechtenstein, the  UK, Australia, Ireland, Switzerland, Italy, Portugal,  Greece, Sweden and Monaco urged the Conference to produce a  mandate for a protocol to be concluded by 1997. Many called  for stronger and more specific emission reduction targets  and commitments beyond the year 2000. Germany called for  stabilization of emissions and cited its goal of halving  GHGs, expressed in CO2 equivalents, by 2005. Japan agreed  that the next step was a protocol, and Canada stressed  'technological twinning' between developed and developing  countries. The US stated it was committed to the current  reduction aims and that the Conference should produce a  mandate to negotiate an agreement.

## CLOSING PLENARY

On Friday morning, 7 April 1995, President Angela Merkel  opened the final session of the Plenary and introduced  document FCCC/CP/1995/L.14, review of the adequacy of  commitments in Article 4.2(a) and (b). She said that the  industrialized countries' agreement to specific measures and  the developing countries' agreement to reaffirm and advance  existing commitments meant that the process would advance.  She thanked all the delegates for their diligence,  flexibility and constructive attitude. After the decision  was adopted, a number of delegates asked for the floor.

India said the decision to launch a process to strengthen  the commitments made COP-1 a success, noting that  consultations were not easy. He thanked environmental NGOs  for their support.

The EU stated its understanding that the wording 'developed  countries/other Parties' in section II(2)(a) must be  interpreted as 'developed countries and/or other Parties'  and means that this sub-paragraph applies to Annex I Parties  within the European Community, individually or jointly among  themselves, in accordance with Article 4.2(a) and (b) of the  Convention.

After the first few speakers, the Plenary was interrupted by  a group of protesters who ran down from the balcony and   shouted that the delegates were not doing enough. Others  draped banners and flung leaflets onto the Plenary floor.  The security officers led them away as many supporters  applauded. President Merkel remarked that the group had now  heard another opinion, but added that overall NGOs had  played a constructive role.

The US proposed, in light of Germany's efforts in organizing  the Conference and the leadership of the President, that the  Conference should designate this decision as 'The Berlin  Mandate.' Samoa, on behalf of AOSIS, expressed disappointment that the  COP was unable to agree to words as clear and true as the  AOSIS protocol. Although excluded from the final  negotiations, AOSIS will not allow the world to barter the  islands' future for short-term interests. He promised the  island States will continue to play the role of the earth's  early warning system to put the heat on this process, to  close the commitment gap and to reach out for new  partnerships. The upcoming negotiations should use the AOSIS  protocol as the basis.

Saudi Arabia placed a reservation on the decision. He said  his delegation had made many concessions to help the COP  reach a solution. It is highly regrettable this document  does not take into consideration everything submitted by his  country.

The Marshall Islands expressed disappointment that  negotiations moved below the lowest common denominator. Only  a small number of countries remain obstinate and  obstructionist. AOSIS countries are not happy but are  willing to move forward and will not stop until they get  commitments that should have been made in Berlin. He urged  delegates not be self-congratulatory.

Fiji stated that the decision represented a minimalist  document. The decision should refer to the clear need for  reduction targets but instead only pays lip service to the  AOSIS protocol.

Papua New Guinea stated that the biggest disappointment was  the waiting game that developing States must play in  adoption of the AOSIS protocol. He expressed frustration  that the protocol was not adopted in Berlin.

Venezuela expressed disappointment that major positions have  not been reflected in the document. He stated that Venezuela  is determined to continue fostering measures that will help  preserve the environment, and placed a reservation on the  decision.

Kuwait found this document did not satisfy the Convention's  requirements as a country with special needs under Article  4.8(h) of the Convention. He could not accept that the  Conference had carried out a review nor that existing  commitments in Article 4.2(a) and (b) were inadequate, and  registered a reservation.

Mauritius said his delegation did not have very much to be  proud of, and will leave Berlin with a sense of sadness for  having something that is 'half-baked.' The wide support for  the AOSIS protocol was not reflected in the final decision.

 Malaysia shared the disappointment of AOSIS and said the  language is as ambiguous as the original commitments adopted  in 1992. Negotiations reflected the lack of political will  by some countries to take urgent action.

The Maldives said small island States have been  marginalized, sidelined and totally bypassed in some of the  decisions. He lamented the short-sightedness, lack of  political will and impossible situation where delegates fail  to understand what is going on.

Iran said that Convention provisions have not been  implemented as stated, and COP-1 should be reviewing current  commitments. The unreasonably low price of oil will render  any future commitments unrealizable, therefore the price of  oil should be allowed to reach a reasonable level.

The United Arab Emirates said that the actions were not  scientifically based and could not accept some parts of the  decision on the adequacy of commitments.

The Plenary then considered the date and venue of COP-2.  Uruguay expressed interest in hosting COP-2 and described  the benefits of choosing his country to serve as host.

Turkey delivered a statement about its status under the  Convention. Although listed among developed countries,  Turkey is a developing country and its commitments under the  Convention should reflect its level of development. He cited  other international conventions and organizations that apply  developing country status to Turkey and said that Turkey  will sign the Convention only if granted immunities  reflecting its unique position.

During the afternoon session, delegates adopted the  decisions recommended by INC-11, listed in  A/AC.237/91/Add.1. These include: Recommendation 1: The  report on implementation; Recommendation 3: Preparation and  submission of national communications from Annex I Parties;  Recommendation 4: First communications from non-Annex I  Parties; Recommendation 7: Methodological issues;  Recommendation 9: Maintenance of the interim arrangements  referred to in Article 21, paragraph 3 of the Convention;  Recommendation 10: Arrangements between the COP and an  operating entity or entities of the financial mechanism; and  Recommendation 11: Initial guidance on policies, programme  priorities and eligibility criteria to the operating entity  or entities of the financial mechanism.

The COP also adopted the following decisions:FCCC/CP/1995/L.1, the report of the GEF; FCCC/CP/1995/L.2/Rev.1, financial procedures; FCCC/CP/1995/L.4/Rev.1, Convention budget; FCCC/CP/1995/L.5/Rev.1, roles of subsidiary bodies; FCCC/CP/1995/L.7, extrabudgetary funding; FCCC/CP/1995/L.8/Rev.1, other voluntary funding; FCCC/CP/1995/L.10, transfer of technology; FCCC/CP/1995/L. 12, location of the Secretariat; and  FCCC/CP/1995/L.13, activities implemented jointly under the  pilot phase.

The President then suggested to transmit the draft Rules of  Procedure, as contained in A/AC.237/L.22/Rev.2 and  FCCC/CP/1995/L.2, to COP-2 for its consideration. This was  adopted. The Plenary also adopted the report on the  credentials of delegates to COP-1 (FCCC/CP/1995/6).  Representatives from 117 Parties participated in this  session of the COP. The Conference then adopted  FCCC/CP/1995/L.15, on the date and venue of the second  session of the COP. The decision notes Uruguay's interest in  hosting COP-2 and that the Bureau will decide on the date  and venue no later than October 1995. COP-2 will take place  no later than October 1996. The Conference then adopted the  Report of First Session of the Conference of the Parties  (FCCC/CP/1995/L.6, Add. 1 and Add. 2). The Philippines, on  behalf of the G-77 and China, introduced document  FCCC/CP/1995/L.11, a resolution expressing appreciation to  Germany and the city of Berlin, which the Conference  adopted.

Saudi Arabia commented that because the Conference had not  adopted the Rules of Procedure, the officers cannot be  called 'the Bureau,' but should be referred to as 'officers  of the first Conference of the Parties.' The President  replied that the Rules had been applied and officers will  continue to serve as the Bureau.

The Plenary heard concluding statements from the  Philippines, on behalf of the G-77 and China, Algeria, on  behalf of the African States, Antigua and Barbuda, on behalf  of the Latin American and Caribbean Group, Executive  Secretary Michael Zammit Cutajar, and Chile, on behalf of  the Valdivia Group, before COP President Angela Merkel  closed the meeting.

# A BRIEF ANALYSIS OF COP-1

Was the first meeting of the Conference of the Parties to  the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change a success?  Unlike many UN conferences where delegates and observers  leave the conference with both a sense of accomplishment and  a sense of relief, evaluations of COP-1 depend on the group  of countries or observers asked and the aspect of the  Conference considered.

From an organizational or administrative point of view, COP- 1 accomplished much more than the Conferences of the Parties  for many other environmental conventions. The budget for the  biennium 1996-1997 was adopted. Delegates also agreed that  the GEF would continue to serve as the interim financial  mechanism. The subsidiary bodies have been established and  are set to begin work in October. The COP also adopted a  number of decisions taken at INC-11 on: the preparation and  submission of national communications from Annex I Parties;  first communications from Parties not included in Annex I;  arrangements between the COP and the operating entity or  entities of the financial mechanism; and initial guidance on  policies, programme priorities and eligibility criteria to  the operating entity or entities of  the financial  mechanism. Finally, with help from creative problem-solving  on the part of the Chair of the Committee of the Whole, Amb.  Rau'l Estrada-Oyuela, the Parties decided that the Permanent  Secretariat should be established and located in Bonn.  Although not everyone was pleased with this decision and the  personal impact that it could have on the members of the  Secretariat it was, nonetheless, accepted as the decision of  the Parties.

# JOINT IMPLEMENTATION

Most of those delegates and observers who have been focused  on the issue of joint implementation (JI) also left Berlin  with a sense of accomplishment. JI was first placed on the  agenda at INC-7. It is clear from Article 4.2(a) that JI can  take place between Annex I Parties, but at INC-8 discussion  opened on broadening JI to include developing countries.  This raised developing countries' fears about its potential  implications and impacts. Numerous developing countries  viewed JI as a means for Annex I Parties to avoid domestic  action to meet current commitments under the Convention. The  developing countries were also concerned that JI be  supplemental and not substitute for funding and the  financial mechanism established under the Convention.

The shift in the position of certain developing countries at  INC-11 towards voluntary participation of developing  countries in a JI pilot phase was more widespread at COP-1.  After a number of formal statements from Latin American  countries, with the notable exception of Brazil, that  favored a JI pilot phase with the participation of non-Annex  I countries, it appeared as though a number of Asian  countries soon followed suit. As acceptance of the pilot  phase and the consensus that no credits shall accrue to any  Party during the pilot phase grew within the G-77, Annex I  Parties grappled with the credits issue. Some countries,  particularly the US, continued to insist on emissions  credits during the pilot phase.

When delegates finally reached consensus on the draft  decision establishing the pilot phase, most of the reactions  were positive. JI proponents and certain Annex I Parties  felt that the pilot phase would alleviate the fears of  developing countries and lead to greater acceptance of JI.  Developing countries were reassured that their participation  in the pilot phase was voluntary and that no emissions  credits would accrue. The fears of 'trees for smoke' have  been temporarily allayed.

# RULES OF PROCEDURE

Despite these positive steps, COP-1 was unable to resolve  all of the matters before it. The Rules of Procedure have  still not been adopted. While many view this as simply a  bureaucratic matter, the two outstanding issues could have  major implications for the future work of the COP. The  inability of both the INC and COP-1 to arrive at a consensus  on the Rules of Procedure also attests to their  contentiousness and importance. The two major outstanding  issues are the composition of the Bureau and voting  procedures. The oil producing developing States continued to   stand firm on language that would give them a seat on the  Bureau and would force all protocols to be adopted by  consensus. Some members of the EU continued to insist that  all matters relating to the financial mechanism should be  taken by consensus. Other members of the G-77 agreed that  all matters should be decided by consensus or, if no  consensus is possible, by a three-fourths majority vote.  Despite numerous proposals put forward by COP-1 President  Angela Merkel, the two weeks of consultations did not bear  fruit. At the final Plenary session delegates agreed to send  the Rules of Procedure to COP-2 for further consideration.  Many are concerned about the effects that this impasse may  have on the negotiation of a protocol to strengthen the  commitments in Article 4.2(a) and (b) of the Convention.  Since the OPEC member States are largely opposed to the  protocol negotiations and are holding up agreement on the  Rules of Procedure, they could effectively block the future  work of the COP and its subsidiary bodies.

# ADEQUACY OF COMMITMENTS

The vast majority of the participants and observers at COP- 1, however, focused their attention on the review of the  adequacy of commitments and the negotiation of a mandate for  negotiation of a protocol. Reactions to the outcome of these  negotiations were strong and varied. Since the AOSIS  countries submitted a draft protocol for consideration in  September 1994, the discussions on the need for a protocol  and the adequacy and implementation of existing commitments  have been at center stage. In fact, many journalists and  NGOs came to Berlin with the belief that if delegates did  not agree to negotiate a protocol (or, in some cases, adopt  the AOSIS protocol), the COP would be a failure.

At INC-11 there were multiple positions on this issue. The  AOSIS draft protocol requires Annex I Parties to the  protocol to reduce their CO2 emissions by 2005 to a level of  at least 20% below that of 1990, and to establish timetables  for controlling emissions of other gases. Initially only  some developing countries supported the AOSIS protocol. OPEC  countries and China said that the protocol negotiations were  premature since neither the best available scientific  information nor the review of Annex I Parties'  communications provided a sufficient basis for negotiations.  OECD countries in general supported a comprehensive protocol  on all GHGs, stating that negotiations should begin at COP- 1. The US said only that it supported the need to consider  'new aims' through negotiations under the SBI for the post- 2000 period, generally avoiding the word 'protocol.'  Nordic  countries supported stronger action and countries with  economies in transition said it was premature to take action  on new commitments.

Upon arrival in Berlin, the most notable shift in position  was that of India. Rather than opposing negotiations towards  a protocol as it had in the past, India stepped forward and  took the lead within the G-77 by preparing the first draft  decision on the adequacy of commitments. When the G-77 and  China could not endorse the Indian proposal, the meeting   adjourned and, instead, India convened a meeting of like- minded States. This group of 72 countries - also called the  'Green Group' -submitted this draft decision to the  consultative group chaired by Amb. Bo Kjelle'n. The draft  decision, which became known as the 'Green Paper,' was a  collective effort of developing countries and environmental  NGOs who worked together to gain acceptance of the draft.

Despite this breakthrough, negotiations were not easy. Focus  was diverted from the need to strengthen commitments to the  differentiated responsibilities of developing countries.  This reaction was largely the result of the German elements  paper circulated at INC-11, which had included a section  placing different commitments on different categories of  developing countries. The developing countries consistently  rejected this idea, but other OECD countries supported the  notion that the more industrialized developing countries  should accept additional responsibility for their GHG  emissions. OPEC countries continued to insist that the time  was not ripe for negotiation of a protocol. Certain OECD  countries, including the US and Australia, could not endorse  the AOSIS protocol as the basis for future negotiations  because of the targets, timetables and the focus on CO2  emissions rather than GHG emissions as a whole. Delegates  negotiated day and night and finally on the last night of  the Conference, the ministers were brought in at 11:00 pm to  work out the final compromise. It took a full night of  shuttle diplomacy on the part of COP President Angela  Merkel, a few ministers and other sleep-deprived delegates  to forge the final compromise, which was formally adopted on  the last day of the Conference. Despite its adoption, the  decision to establish an ad hoc open-ended group to  negotiate a protocol or other legal instrument to strengthen  the commitments in Article 4.2(a) and (b) was not  universally embraced.

AOSIS countries accepted the draft, but decried the lack of  transparency in the final phase of negotiations where no  AOSIS delegates were present. They felt that it was a weak  document that does not refer to the clear need for reduction  targets and only pays lip service to the AOSIS draft  protocol. Some AOSIS members blamed a small number of  'obstinate and obstructionist countries' for the 'vague,  ambiguous and unfair' document.

The US and Australia, to name a few developed countries,  seemed to be pleased with the outcome. The US called for the  decision to be designated as 'The Berlin Mandate.' Others  felt that the decision to negotiate a protocol or other  legal instrument was a positive step forward.

While environmental NGOs agreed with AOSIS that the mandate  for negotiations was 'soft' at best, they vowed to fight for  the Toronto Target and the AOSIS protocol during the  upcoming two years of negotiations. NGOs representing  business and industry did not rejoice over the adoption of  the decision either. One delegate commented that  environmental interests gained more than business and  industry interests. Echoing this thought, Saudi Arabia,   Venezuela and Kuwait placed official reservations on the  document since it did not satisfy their requirements as  countries with special conditions recognized by Article  4.8(h).

# CHALLENGES FOR THE FUTURE

In spite of the mixed feelings about the COP's decision,  there is now agreement on a mandate for future negotiations.  The inadequacy of current commitments has been recognized by  the majority of Parties. For the next two years the focus of  the Parties to the Convention will be on the negotiation of  this protocol or other legal instrument. While these  negotiations are crucial for the period beyond the year  2000, one cannot overlook the fact that most Annex I  Parties, with the exception of the Netherlands and the Czech  Republic, are not on the road to meeting existing  commitments. This reality is a far cry from the positive  statements delivered by Annex I Parties during the  Ministerial Segment that made it appear as though the  majority of Annex I Parties were in a position to reduce  their CO2 emissions to 1990 levels. Throughout the INC  process as well as at the first Conference of the Parties,  environmental NGOs have been stating that actions speak  louder than words. Commitments, existing or new, are  worthless if they are not implemented.

The results of COP-1 may pose additional challenges for the  future. The progress on addressing the adequacy commitments  was achieved at the expense of excluding the most ardent  supporters and opponents of expanded commitments from some  of the critical negotiations. Some new coalitions, such as  the Green Group, may have emerged, but major divisions  between Parties have been left intact or may have even  widened. The unresolved questions about the voting procedure  and the composition of the Bureau in the Rules of Procedure  are another shadow on the Convention's future. Finding ways  to overcome these differences will demand creativity and  cooperation in the coming months.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR BEFORE COP-2

### SUBSIDIARY BODY ON IMPLEMENTATION

The SBI is scheduled to  hold its first session in October 1995 in Geneva. The exact  dates should be announced soon. The programme of work  includes: consideration of the work plan; work relating to  the follow-up to the review of the adequacy of Article  4.2(a) and (b); work relating to the review of national  communications; and matters relating to the financial  mechanism. Other sessions of the SBI before COP-2 are  scheduled for February, April and July 1996.

### SUBSIDIARY BODY ON SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE

The  SBSTA is scheduled to hold its first session in October 1995  in Geneva. The exact dates should be announced soon. The  programme of work includes: consideration of the work plan  and relationships with the IPCC and other bodies;  organization of the work of the intergovernmental technical  advisory panels; planning for consideration of the IPCC  Second Assessment Report; and work relating to review of  national communications. The intergovernmental technical   advisory panels are scheduled to meet in January 1996. Other  meetings of the SBSTA are scheduled for February, April and  July 1996. There is also a planned workshop on non- governmental inputs in January 1996. This workshop, open to  all Parties and interested non-governmental participants, is  expected to discuss the need for and possible scope,  structure, membership and work plans of non-governmental  advisory committees and/or a business consultative mechanism  and report recommendations to COP-2.

NEGOTIATIONS TO STRENGTHEN THE COMMITMENTS IN ARTICLE 4.2(a)  and (b): The dates have not yet been set for the first  meeting of the open-ended ad hoc group of Parties to  negotiate a protocol or other legal instrument to strengthen  the commitments in Article 4.2(a) and (b).  It is possible  that the negotiating group will meet in October 1995, either  before or after the meetings of the subsidiary bodies. The  Bureau and the Secretariat are expected to take a decision  on the dates after consulting with the UN Committee on  Conferences.

### COP-2

The date and venue of the second session of the  Conference of the Parties will be decided by the Bureau by  October 1995. The meeting will be of one week's duration and  will be preceded by meetings of the subsidiary bodies.  Uruguay has offered to host COP-2, which will take place by  October 1996.