---
title: "THE FOURTH MEETING OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE UN FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE, 2-13 November 1998"
id: enb1287e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1287e
date: 1998-11-13
abstract: "The Fourth Meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the UN  Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP-4) will be held from  2-13 November 1998 in Buenos Aires, Argentina. Delegates will  discuss the implementation of commitments of the Convention,  including national communications, development and transfer of  technology, the second review of the adequacy of commitments and  activities implemented jointly (AIJ). Delegates will also debate  matters related to the Kyoto Protocol, including land-use change  and forestry, Article 6 (certified emissions reductions),  Article 12 (clean development mechanism) and Article 17  (international emissions trading). Delegates will also discuss  voluntary commitments by non-Annex I Parties. A high-level  segment is scheduled from 12-13 November 1998."
---

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FCCC AND THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

### COP-1

The first meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the  FCCC (COP-1) took place in Berlin from 28 March - 7 April 1995.  In addition to addressing a number of important issues related  to the future of the Convention, delegates reached agreement on  what many believed to be the central issue before COP-1 -  adequacy of commitments, the 'Berlin Mandate.' The result was to  establish an open-ended Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate  (AGBM) to begin a process toward appropriate action for the  period beyond 2000, including the strengthening of the  commitments of Annex I Parties through the adoption of a  protocol or another legal instrument.

COP-1 also requested the Secretariat to make arrangements for  sessions of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological  Advice (SBSTA) and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI).  SBSTA would serve as the link between scientific, technical and  technological assessments, the information provided by competent  international bodies, and the policy-oriented needs of the COP.  During the AGBM process, SBSTA addressed several issues,  including the treatment of the IPCC's Second Assessment Report  (SAR). SBI was created to develop recommendations to assist the  COP in the review and assessment of the implementation of the  Convention and in the preparation and implementation of its  decisions. SBI also addressed several key issues during the AGBM  process, such as the national communications and activities  implemented jointly.

The Ad Hoc Group on Article 13 (AG13) was set up to consider the  establishment of a multilateral consultative process available  to Parties to resolve questions on implementation. AG13-1, held  from 30-31 October 1995 in Geneva, decided to request Parties,  non-Parties, and intergovernmental and non-governmental  organizations (NGO) to make written submissions in response to a  questionnaire on a multilateral consultative process (MCP).  Delegates continued their discussion over the course of three  meetings. At their fifth session, they agreed that the MCP  should be advisory rather than supervisory in nature and AG13  should complete its work by COP-4.

### AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE

The AGBM met eight times  between August 1995 and COP-3 in December 1997. During the first  three sessions, delegates focused on analyzing and assessing  possible policies and measures for the strengthening of the  commitments of Annex I Parties, how Annex I countries might  distribute or share new commitments, and whether commitments  should take the form of an amendment or protocol. AGBM-4, which  coincided with COP-2 in Geneva in July 1996, completed its in- depth analysis of the likely elements of a protocol and States  appeared ready to prepare a negotiating text. At AGBM-5, which  met in December 1996, delegates recognized the need to decide  whether or not to allow mechanisms that would provide Annex I  Parties with flexibility in meeting quantified emission  limitation and reduction objectives (QELROs).

During the sixth and seventh sessions of the AGBM, in March and  August 1997, respectively, delegates 'streamlined' a framework  compilation text by merging or eliminating some overlapping  provisions within the myriad of proposals. Much of the  discussion centered on a proposal from the EU for a 15% cut in a  'basket' of three greenhouse gases by the year 2010 compared to  1990 levels.

In October 1997, as AGBM-8 began, US President Bill Clinton  included a call for 'meaningful participation' by developing  countries in the negotiating position he announced in  Washington. With those words, the debates that shaped agreement  back in 1995 resurfaced, with an insistence on G-77/China  involvement once again linked to the level of ambition  acceptable by the US. In response, the G-77/China distanced  itself from any attempts to draw developing countries into  agreeing to anything that could be interpreted as new  commitments.

### COP-3

The Third Conference of the Parties (COP-3) to the FCCC  was held from 1 - 11 December 1997 in Kyoto, Japan. Over 10,000  participants, including representatives from governments,  intergovernmental organizations, NGOs and the press, attended  the Conference, which included a high-level segment featuring  statements from over 125 ministers. Following a week and a half  of intense formal and informal negotiations, including a session  that began on the final evening and continued into the following  day, Parties to the FCCC adopted the Kyoto Protocol on 11  December.

In the Kyoto Protocol, Annex I Parties to the FCCC agreed to  commitments with a view to reducing their overall emissions of  six greenhouse gases (GHGs) by at least 5% below 1990 levels  between 2008 and 2012. The Protocol also establishes emissions  trading, 'joint implementation' between developed countries, and  a clean development mechanism (CDM) to encourage joint emissions  reduction projects between developed and developing countries.  As of 29 September 1998, 57 countries had signed the Kyoto  Protocol.

# SELECTED MEETINGS SINCE KYOTO

### MEETINGS OF THE FCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES

The subsidiary bodies of  the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC) met from 2- 12 June 1998 in Bonn, Germany. These were the first formal FCCC  meetings since the adoption of the Kyoto Protocol at the Third  Conference of the Parties (COP-3) in December 1997. The eighth  session of SBSTA (SBSTA-8) agreed to draft conclusions on, inter  alia, cooperation with relevant international organizations,  methodological issues, and education and training. The eighth  session of SBI (SBI-8) reached conclusions on, inter alia,  national communications, the financial mechanism and the second  review of adequacy of Annex I Party commitments. In its sixth  session, the Ad Hoc Group on Article 13 (AG13) concluded its  work on the functions of the Multilateral Consultative Process  (MCP). After joint SBI/SBSTA consideration and extensive contact  group debates on the flexibility mechanisms, delegates could  only agree to a compilation document containing proposals from  the G-77/China, the EU and the US.

### FOURTEENTH SESSION OF THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE  CHANGE (IPCC)

IPCC's 14th Plenary Session was held in Vienna  from 1-3 October 1998. The IPCC approved the chapter outlines  for the Special Report on Land Use, Land Use Change and  Forestry. SBSTA requested the Special Report from the IPCC at  SBSTA-8. The Special Report will be completed around May 2000  under the chairmanship of Dr. Robert T. Watson, Chair of the  IPCC. The IPCC took note of the chapter outlines of the reports  of the three Working Groups that will form the first three  volumes of its Third Assessment Report (TAR). The IPCC also  decided on the procedure to approve and adopt the Synthesis  Report of its Third Assessment Report. The Synthesis Report will  consist of a Summary for Policymakers (5-10 pages) and an  underlying longer report (ca. 50 pages). The target date for  completing the Synthesis Report is mid-2001. The reports of the  three IPCC Working Groups (and their SPMs) will be completed 3-4  months earlier.

The IPCC also reviewed and amended the Principles Governing its  Work. It agreed to establish a Task Force for National  Greenhouse Gas Inventories (TFI) with a Bureau and a Technical  Support Unit (TSU/TFI). The Government of Japan has agreed to  establish and maintain the TSU/TFI at the Institute for Global  Environmental Strategies, a NGO near Tokyo, and will name a Co- Chair for TFI. The other Co-Chair will be from a developing  country. Until IPCC-XVI, the TFI Bureau will consist of 8-12  members, drawn from the countries represented on the IPCC  Bureau. For more information contact: IPCC Secretariat, World  Meteorological Organization, 41 Ave., Giuseppe-Motta, CP No.  2300, 1211 Geneva 2, Switzerland; tel: (+41 22) 730 8284; fax:  (+41 22) 733 1270.

### IEA-UNEP PARIS WRAP-UP SESSION

The last of a series of joint  IEA-UNEP regional workshops on the CDM took place in Paris,  France from 7-8 October 1998 and was attended by approximately  130 participants from 41 countries. Climate Change experts,  negotiators, government, NGO and industry representatives  exchanged views on what priorities and issues should be  addressed at COP-4 and beyond to promote the CDM. Other  workshops had been held in Brazil, India, China and Ghana. IEA  and UNEP sought to build awareness on the CDM and provide an  informal platform for discussion.

Although there were no official conclusions, participants agreed  that CDM projects should achieve: sustainable development  objectives established by the host developing country; cost  effective emission reductions for developed countries; and  global GHG emission reductions. Key operational issues that need  to be addressed in order to ensure credibility and effectiveness  of CDM are: governance procedures; establishment of baselines  and definitions of additionality; a good certification process;  clear, transparent and consistent rules; and significant  capacity building in developing countries in order for them to  develop, implement and monitor CDM projects.

Major unresolved issues include: equity in the implementation of  the CDM (balance of benefits between Annex I and non-Annex I  countries, balance of projects between regions in non-Annex I  countries); clear definition of governance procedures, baselines  and the certification process; sharing of credits (percentage of  CERs between host and investor countries); interconnection  between CDM projects and national sustainable development  priorities; linkages with other cooperative mechanisms including  a possible adaptation fee on all mechanisms and a cap on the use  of these mechanisms in meeting Kyoto commitments; and more  specificity with respect to capacity building to help develop  and implement the CDM--for what, for whom and using what funds.

Participants also highlighted the following risks: devaluation  of national commitments in Annex I countries or risk that the  Kyoto Protocol will not be ratified (creates a lower demand for  CERs); price of CERs influenced by emissions trading and other  opportunities for cost-effective actions. Although no consensus  was reached (or sought) participants expressed the view that  they left the workshop with a better understanding of each  other's views and concerns leading into COP- 4.  This will  enable negotiators to have fewer 'surprises' and give them a  head start on fixing priorities for work after COP- 4. The IEA  and UNEP will be holding a side event at COP- 4 on 6 November  from 1:00-3:00 pm to present the results of the regional CDM  workshops and inform negotiators of the main outcomes of this  joint effort.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### PLENARY

Plenary will meet at 10:00 am and continue in the  afternoon as necessary. The subsidiary bodies will meet  following plenary.