---
title: "UNFCCC WORKSHOP ON ENABLING ENVIRONMENTS FOR TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER: 9-10 APRIL 2003"
id: enb12210e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12210e
date: 2003-04-10
abstract: "The workshop on enabling environments for technology transfer  convened from 9-10 April 2003, at the Het Pand Conference Center,  Ghent University, Belgium. The workshop was organized by the  Secretariat of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change  (UNFCCC) in collaboration with the Center for Sustainable  Development, Ghent University. The workshop was convened in  response to a request by the UNFCCC's Subsidiary Body for  Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) at its seventeenth  session, held in October 2002. The SBSTA also requested the  Secretariat to prepare a technical paper on enabling environments  for the transfer of environmentally-sound technology (ESTs) for  consideration by the UNFCCC Expert Group on Technology Transfer  (EGTT) at its third meeting in late May 2003. In response to this  request, the Secretariat commissioned the Tata Energy and Resource  Institute (TERI) to develop a draft technical paper on the issue.  The paper was submitted in early April."
---

Fifty-three representatives of governments, intergovernmental  organizations, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), business and  industry groups, and academic institutions attended the workshop.  Plenary sessions on Wednesday, 9 April, and Thursday, 10 April,  provided an overview of the technology transfer issue, reviewed  the draft technical paper on enabling environments, and examined  barriers and opportunities to technology transfer. On Thursday  morning, participants also convened in two working groups to  discuss: the means for governments to identify barriers to  technology transfer and ways to overcome them; and the role that  multilateral lending institutions, bilateral programmes and the  private sector could play to assist governments in overcoming  those barriers. Workshop participants also provided inputs for the  work of the EGTT and elements for possible actions to promote  enabling environments, for further consideration by the EGTT and  the SBSTA.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE UNFCCC AND TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER

Climate change is considered one of the most serious threats to  the world's environment, with negative impacts expected on human  health, food security, economic activity, water and other natural  resources, and physical infrastructure. Global climate varies  naturally, but scientists agree that rising concentrations of  anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions in the Earth's atmosphere  are leading to changes in the climate. According to the  Intergovernmental Panel of Climate Change (IPCC), the effects of  climate change have already been observed. Despite some lingering  uncertainties, the majority of climate scientists believe that  prompt and precautionary action is necessary.

The international political response to climate change began with  the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). Adopted in  1992, the UNFCCC sets out a framework for action aimed at  stabilizing atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases to  avoid 'dangerous interference' with the climate system. The  greenhouse gases to be limited include methane, nitrous oxide, and,  in particular, carbon dioxide. The UNFCCC entered into force on 21  March 1994. It currently has 188 Parties.

### TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER

Technology transfer is considered a key  element in combating climate change under the UNFCCC. Technology  transfer activities have been on the agenda of every session of  the SBSTA and the Conference of the Parties (COP). UNFCCC Article  4.5, which addresses the need for technology transfer, states that  'developed country Partiesshall take all practicable steps to  promote, facilitate and finance, as appropriate, the transfer of,  or access to, environmentally sound technologies and know-how to  other Parties, particularly developing country Parties, to enable  them to implement the provisions of the Convention,' adding that  'in this process, the developed country Parties shall support the  development and enhancement of endogenous capacities and  technologies of developing country Parties.' At SBSTA-16, held in June 2002, Parties adopted the 2002-2003 work  programme of the Expert Group on Technology Transfer (EGTT), which  focused on enabling environments for the transfer of ESTs. The  SBSTA asked the EGTT to take into account Parties' views and  relevant IPCC reports in implementing its work, and requested a  brief progress report at SBSTA-17. SBSTA-16 also requested the  Secretariat to: initiate an outreach programme to make its  technology information system available to the public; update and  maintain the system; assess the system's effectiveness and report  on it at SBSTA-19; and cooperate with the Global Environment  Facility (GEF), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), and  other relevant organizations and initiatives to develop a  simplified handbook on methodologies for technology needs  assessments, which it is to report on at SBSTA-18.

At SBSTA-17 in October 2002, Parties agreed to a decision  (FCCC/SBSTA/2002/L.29/Add.1) requesting the SBSTA Chair to conduct  consultations and ensure collaboration among expert groups on the  cross-cutting issues of their work programmes, including issues  relating to technology transfer and capacity building. The SBSTA  also called on SBSTA-19 to consider innovative ways to address  outcomes of the technology needs assessments under the EGTT work  programme. It urged developed country Parties to continue to  provide support to developing country Parties, noted several  initiatives on technology transfer, and requested the Secretariat  to prepare a technical paper and organize a workshop on enabling  environments for technology transfer. The technical paper will be  considered by the EGTT in late May 2003.

# REPORT OF THE WORKSHOP

Olivier Deleuze, Belgium's Secretary of State for Energy and  Sustainable Development, opened the workshop on Wednesday morning,  9 April. He noted that technology transfer is a crucial instrument  for the implementation of the UNFCCC and related agreements.  Recalling the World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) Plan  of Implementation and the 2002 UNFCCC New Delhi Declaration, he  highlighted the need for urgent action at all levels and in all  relevant sectors to support mechanisms for the development,  transfer and diffusion of ESTs, especially to developing countries  and countries with economies in transition (EITs). Underscoring  the importance of partnerships and interaction among research  institutions and the public and private sectors, he noted that  identifying and removing barriers are key responsibilities of  governments. Deleuze expressed the hope that this workshop would  contribute to the creation of conditions to enable technology  transfer.

COP-8 President T. R. Baalu, India's Minister of Environment and  Forests, stated that in order to promote technology transfer for  climate change mitigation and adaptation, this workshop should  enhance understanding of policy, regulatory and institutional  barriers and opportunities, and focus on developed countries' role  in transferring publicly-owned technologies and in providing  incentives to the private sector. Reminding participants that the  New Delhi Declaration focused on the dissemination of technology  and on adaptation, Baalu highlighted the need for partnerships and  cooperation among a range of stakeholders and suggested focusing  on 'green credit,' waste minimization, favorable international  terms of trade, and the needs of the most vulnerable individuals.  He announced his plan to organize an international 'Technology  Bazaar' in New Delhi in November 2003, to take stock of progress  on technology transfer in the context of the UNFCCC.

Tahar Hadj-Sadok, UNFCCC Deputy Executive Secretary, noted that at  COP-7, Parties had reached a significant agreement on the  implementation of technology transfer, adopting a framework for  action and establishing the EGTT. He pointed out that sharing,  analyzing and compiling experiences are useful for governments  when designing policies.

# TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER OVERVIEW

On Wednesday morning, participants heard several presentations  that gave an overview of the technology transfer issue. The  presentations focused on three related topics: the development and  transfer of technologies in the context of the UNFCCC; enabling  environments for technology transfer; and a draft technical paper  on enabling environments.

### TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER IN THE UNFCCC CONTEXT

EGTT Chair William Kojo  Agyemang-Bonsu highlighted the importance of transferring ESTs in  implementing the UNFCCC. He drew attention to UNFCCC Article 4.5,  which calls on Annex II Parties (developed country Parties) to  take all practicable steps to promote, facilitate and finance  technology transfer, particularly to developing countries. He  observed that the Marrakesh Accords agreed to at COP-7 had  established a framework for technology transfer, and had  constituted the EGTT to support this work. He reported that the  EGTT had formally convened twice and developed a work programme,  and the challenge now is to move from discussion to supporting  actual implementation of technology transfer. Stating that timely  and appropriate technology transfer remains largely a 'mirage,' he  called for greater collaborative efforts among all Parties to  bridge the 'ever increasing [technology] gap' between developing  and developed countries.

Wanna Tanunchaiwatana, Manager of the UNFCCC's Technology  Subprogramme, presented an overview of the UNFCCC and the Kyoto  Protocol, noting that 106 countries have ratified the Protocol to  date, and that this represents 43% of developed country emissions  (55% is required for the Protocol to enter into force). Reflecting  on technology transfer under the UNFCCC, she highlighted recent  work in this area, including the technology needs assessments  conducted in over 60 countries, and the information exchange  facilitated by the TT:CLEAR website (http://ttclear.unfccc.int/).  She said this workshop would provide input on the draft technical  paper on enabling environments that had been called for by SBSTA- 17 and prepared for the Secretariat. The workshop would also help  identify possible next steps to promote enabling environments, as  well as further actions to enhance work on technology needs  assessments. Identifying upcoming challenges and tasks for the  EGTT, she said it would need to consult with other groups that  address 'developing country issues' under the UNFCCC, in order to  identify cross-cutting issues and potential synergies.

### ENABLING ENVIRONMENTS FOR TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER

EGTT member Bernard  Mazijn (Belgium) described the evolution of discussions on  technology transfer since the 1970s, noting that it was now  considered an integral component in sustainable development, as  demonstrated by the numerous references to the issue in the WSSD  Plan of Implementation. He highlighted a recent EU initiative  focusing on technology transfer in the context of climate change,  sustainable production and consumption, water, soil protection and  cross-cutting enabling activities. At the international level, he  argued that common ground existed among developed and developing  countries for the removal of barriers to technology transfer.  While supporting a clear focus on technology transfer in the  climate change context, he also called for developing synergies  with other multilateral environmental agreements and at a 'meta- level' with other agencies and processes.

Daniele Violetti, UNFCCC Secretariat, outlined the history of work  on enabling environments in the climate change context, including  various recommendations and decisions taken since SB-5 in 1997. He  took note of a survey (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/INF.5) carried out in 1997  by the Secretariat and the University of Amsterdam that had  identified Annex I Parties' public policies for promoting  technology transfer. These policies included measures to create  awareness, disseminate information, provide technical assistance,  create an appropriate fiscal environment, and remove trade  barriers. Violetti also drew attention to another technical paper  on barriers and opportunities to technology transfer  (FCCC/TP/1998.1) that had identified institutional, political,  technical, financial, general, and cultural barriers, as well as  opportunities relating to legal instruments and tax regimes,  partnerships, the dissemination of information on government  programmes, and economic instruments and environmental standards.

Participants also heard a presentation on enabling environments  from Ogunlade Davidson, Co-Chair of IPCC Working Group III. Noting  the importance of broad stakeholder involvement, he said it is  essential to identify the motivations that drive various  stakeholders to engage in the technology transfer process. To  develop an enabling environment for technology transfer, he said  developed countries should support the development agenda and  local capacities in non-Annex I Parties and EITs, establish  systems that are sufficiently flexible to cope with the unique  conditions in different developing countries, and support  effective consultations and long-term commitments. Developing  countries should establish a clear development agenda, identify  indigenous capacities, coordinate external resources, set up an  effective consultative process, and develop appropriate monitoring  and evaluation systems.

### DRAFT TECHNICAL PAPER ON ENABLING ENVIRONMENTS FOR TECHNOLOGY  TRANSFER

Malini Ranganathan, UNFCCC Consultant, presented the  draft technical paper, noting that a combination of instruments is  needed to create enabling environments for technology transfer.  Emphasizing that the paper does not recommend best practices but  rather synthesizes implemented policies, she outlined the paper's  structure, which includes chapters setting out a common  understanding of enabling environments through experience sharing,  and on connecting enabling environments with different sectors.  The paper also contains case studies and conclusions relating to  cross-cutting and other issues. She explained that the ten  dimensions of enabling environments identified by the IPCC were  referenced throughout the paper in order to analyze what has been  done to date. This includes work on:national systems of innovation; human and institutional capacity; sustainable markets; national legal institutions; macroeconomic policy frameworks; social infrastructure and participatory approaches; codes, standards and certification; equity considerations; rights to productive resources; and research and technology development.

Ranganathan explained that the paper identifies barriers and  enabling environments for technology transfer in different sectors  of the economy. In the construction, transport, industrial and  energy supply sectors, barriers related to failures in: reflecting  economic and environmental costs in prices; enforcing regulations;  ensuring awareness of relevant measures; and developing affordable  cleaner technology. Positive measures to establish enabling  environments included liberalization and deregulation, the setting  of appropriate standards, support for market transformation,  adaptive research and development, and the strengthening of  capacities.

For agriculture and forestry, she noted barriers relating to  sources of food and livelihood security for developing countries,  the high cost of patented technology, and the limited short-term  profitability of some ESTs. Responses to these barriers could  include involvement of NGOs and participatory programmes with  stakeholders, cooperation with international institutions, the use  of national plant breeding laboratories, and research and  development. On solid waste management, barriers include limited  finance, greenhouse gas abatement, insufficient technological  know-how, and inadequate institutional capability. Responses could  include measures to encourage private sector participation,  recognition of socially-marginalized groups, proactive NGOs, and  adaptive research and development.

In the areas of public health and coastal zone adaptation,  barriers identified by the draft paper include the high degree of  uncertainty and costs of advanced information gathering systems.  Responses include the development of information on sea-level  monitoring in the public domain, the active involvement of NGOs  and national networks, and capacity building.

Identifying some cross-cutting issues raised in the paper,  Ranganathan stressed that market instruments often play a more  significant role for mitigation-focused sectors such as  construction, industry, transport and energy, while government and  socially-oriented organizations play the primary role in  adaptation-focused sectors such as agriculture and forestry, and  in coastal zone development. On the liberalization and  restructuring of the energy sector, she indicated that a portfolio  of policy instruments, public awareness raising, and regulation  must be combined with market based measures. She said that efforts  to create enabling environments for technology transfer are  necessary in both investor and host countries.

### DISCUSSION

In the subsequent discussion, a number of delegates  said the draft technical paper was very useful, while several  noted the absence of detailed empirical information. Responding to  questions about the purpose of the paper, Ranganathan answered  that it aims to provide background information for policy makers  and will feed into the EGTT and SBSTA-18 discussions. One  developed country speaker said the report could have considered  certain issues in more detail, including the conditions and  circumstances that have led to successes and failures, the issue  of licensing, and the elements needed to replicate success from  one area to others. Another developed country requested more  information on the report's consideration of macro and micro level  matters. Responding to these requests for more detailed  information, Ranganathan observed that case studies of technology  transfer in the context of environmental issues were not  particularly well described in the existing literature. She also  noted concerns that the document should not be overly long. One  developing country participant stressed the importance of  considering cross-sectoral issues. On the question of adaptation  and mitigation responses, he suggested that some responses to  climate change, such as pollution prevention, could be categorized  as both adaptation and mitigation.

# BARRIERS TO AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER

### CASE  STUDIES AND LESSONS LEARNED

On Wednesday afternoon, participants heard presentations on two  related issues: barriers to and opportunities for technology  transfer in specific sectors with regard to mitigation and  adaptation; and enabling environments for technology transfer -  incentives, standards, legal instruments and institutional  arrangements. The session was chaired by EGTT Vice-Chair Richard  Bradley (US).

### BARRIERS TO AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER IN SPECIFIC  SECTORS WITH REGARD TO MITIGATION AND ADAPTATION TECHNOLOGIES

EGTT member Holger Liptow (Germany) presented case studies under a  programme developed between Brazil and Germany, in Minas Gerais,  Brazil, aiming at energy policy and planning, energy efficiency  and renewable energy sources. He described a project to establish  centers that house shared/communally-owned machinery, and noted  the need to determine users' expectations, the existence of a  market for their product, and ways to enhance production. Ensuring  suitable financial arrangements for the machinery and interaction  with the relevant agricultural service organizations was also  found to be important. Liptow noted that from 1995-2000, this  programme identified and removed various obstacles, including  inadequacies relating to:scientific, engineering and technical knowledge; research and test facilities; information relevant for strategic planning and market  development; assessment of selected technologies and their appropriate  adaptation; information on technology selection appropriate to  development priorities; consumer awareness and acceptance of technologies; and technical standards and institutions for supporting the  standards.

Andrej Kranjc, Ministry of Environment, Spatial Planning and  Energy, Slovenia, identified three major steps in the technology  transfer process: technology needs assessments, the creation of  enabling environments, and the transfer or deployment of a given  technology. Noting comments that the private sector was  responsible for up to ten times more technology transfer than the  public sector, he said it was clear the public sector had a lot of  work to do. He suggested a strong focus on three issues raised in  the IPCC's Special Report on Methodological and Technological  Issues in Technology Transfer, namely human and institutional  capacities, national legal institutions, and equity considerations.  He also discussed the likely impact of EU expansion on countries  with economies in transition, including strengthened national  legal institutions and human and institutional capacity, as well  as access to relevant EU programmes.

Frederick Manyika, Senior Environmental Officer, Tanzanian  Division of Environment, presented a case study on barriers to the  transfer of solar photovoltaics (PV), in Mwanza. Noting that less  than ten percent of Tanzania's population has access to grid  electricity services and that most rural communities use kerosene  lamps for lighting, Manyika highlighted that solar PV technology  is an economically viable option for off-grid electrification. He  identified barriers to solar PV, including: limited awareness of  and experience with this technology; inadequate business  knowledge and capacity for distribution; the high costs  involved in start-up, operation and maintenance; and the low  purchasing power of rural communities.

Manyika also proposed some means of removing these barriers,  including:building business knowledge and capacity for distribution; reducing tax and import duty; stimulating local manufacture and assembly of components; raising financial opportunities and public awareness; enacting appropriate legislation; and developing and enforcing standards.

He concluded that government support is a key component in  creating energy efficiency and that technology transfer requires  financial support.

Peter Pembleton, Industrial Development Officer, UN Industrial  Development Organization (UNIDO), reported on its work on  technology transfer and on promoting the Clean Development  Mechanism (CDM) in a number of developing countries. Identifying  interventions taken at the national level, he highlighted work to  develop appropriate legal frameworks, including the incorporation  of international treaties such as the UNFCCC into the national  legal system. Other national interventions have included:reducing and simplifying investment approvals and procedures; increasing the amount of public funding allocated to the  development of innovative systems, structures and institutions; creating venture capital to support innovation; reducing banks' interest rates; and achieving macro-economic stability.

### DISCUSSION

In the ensuing discussion, Holger Liptow responded to  a question about the dissemination of lessons learned during  individual projects by noting that stakeholder organizations could  disseminate information both internally and externally. In the  case of the Brazil-Germany programme, the approach had spread to  other utilities, even outside of Brazil. On a question about  mitigation and adaptation, Andrej Kranjc indicated that, so far,  more emphasis had been given to mitigation-related technologies.  However, he predicted that the profile of adaptation-related  technologies would increase over time. Noting participants'  comments on the CDM, Liptow highlighted the interest in using this  mechanism to help achieve technology transfer.

### ENABLING ENVIRONMENTS FOR TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER

INCENTIVES,  STANDARDS, LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS:  Andrea Marroni, Expert on Developing Countries' Issues with the  Italian Ministry for Environment and Territory, presented a paper  on experiences and lessons learned from Italy's programmes and  projects relating to technology transfer. He explained that  Italian cooperation activities are aimed at, inter alia:continuing research and investment to promote diffusion of  renewable energy technology and transfer of low emissions  technologies under the UNFCCC; testing new technologies; fostering competitiveness of recipient countries; and stimulating long-term investments to enhance stakeholders'  participation and financial mechanisms.

Marroni highlighted various lessons learned, including that the  private sector is the main source of technology, that  strengthening the enabling environment in host countries is a  prerequisite for technology transfer, and that relevant  international bodies should support recipient countries in their  domestic reform efforts. On financing technology transfer for  developing countries, he said Italy favors debt-related actions  such as the Debt for Environment Swap, which provides for the debt  conversion into local currency funds devoted to environmental  protection.

Li Junfeng, Energy Research Institute, China, highlighted major  barriers for technology transfer, including a lack of capacity for  innovation and diffusion, obstacles to market creation and  expansion, the initial cost of technology research and development,  and inadequate institutional arrangements and human capacity. He  said that specific actions to encourage technology transfer  included incentives for the private sector to deliver technologies  to developing countries, and stressed that actions to create  enabling environments must be undertaken in both developed and  developing countries. He concluded that technology transfer needs  special financial support and could be transmitted through  official development assistance (ODA).

Shigetaka Seki, Director for Environmental Affairs with Japan's  Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, outlined Japan's recent  work on technology transfer. This includes the establishment of an  inter-ministerial Liaison Committee for using the Kyoto mechanisms.  The Committee will design Joint Implementation (JI) and CDM  project approval and procedures guidelines and consider JI/CDM  project applications. He outlined some public policies to  facilitate CDM projects, including: a Kyoto mechanisms guidebook  in Japanese; development of Japan's National Registry System; the  Asia CDM capacity-building initiative; and cooperation through the  Climate Technology Initiative (CTI), an intergovernmental  organization founded by a number of OECD countries to promote  technology transfer. He concluded that the major barriers for the  CDM and JI include:uncertainties related to institutional settings, rules and  procedures in host countries, including interpretation of the  concept of sustainable development; uncertainties related to rules and procedures under the  UNFCCC; difficulties in setting baselines; protection of intellectual property rights; pricing that fails to reflect true costs; and insufficient enforcement of legislation.

Michael Gerbis, President of the Delphi Group, presented a private  sector perspective on enabling environments in the context of the  CDM and JI. Stressing the opportunities offered by these  mechanisms to facilitate technology transfer, he said barriers to  private sector investment include uncertainty about the levels of  risk involved, and restrictive rules and regulations. Outlining  some of the lessons learned during the Canada-Argentina Capacity  Building Initiative, he said the private sector required clear  risk assessment, strong returns on investment, consistent and  transparent rules from government, and a high potential for  replication of the business opportunity. While cautioning that the  building of enabling environments is often 'difficult and slow,'  he concluded that the process can succeed if it remains clear and  straightforward.

### DISCUSSION

In the ensuing discussion, Michael Gerbis responded to  a question about the impact of the recent economic difficulties in  Argentina on the Canada-Argentina initiative, noting that  stakeholders had agreed to proceed with the project regardless,  since it presented an opportunity to improve efficiency.

Noting the discussion on the CDM and JI, one developing country  speaker stressed that technology transfer under the CDM should be  additional to the technology transfer that takes place under  Article 4.5. In response, Gerbis acknowledged that the issue of  additionality is a 'gray area,' but noted that the CDM can be used  to support technology transfer and ultimately help move forward on  implementing Article 4.5.

### CHAIR'S SUMMARY

Summarizing the afternoon's discussions, Session  Chair Richard Bradley noted that the traditional differences  between North and South remained unresolved, with developed  countries often focusing on the private sector and market forces,  while developing countries tend to stress the role of the public  sector and intergovernmental agreements. However, he highlighted  participants' unanimous agreement that governments have an  important role in terms of developing enabling environments. He  also drew attention to participants' comments on the importance of  sustainable, continuing engagement in technology transfer projects,  on the need to consider how projects can lead to multiple benefits,  and on the 'adaptation versus mitigation' issue. He suggested that  the linkages between micro and macro approaches might require  further discussion. He also noted comments on the role  international mechanisms, such as the CDM, could play in  encouraging technology transfer.

# WORKING GROUPS

On Thursday morning, 10 April, participants met in two parallel  working groups to stimulate a more free-flowing discussion on  several key questions relating to enabling environments for  technology transfer, taking into account the previous day's  plenary discussion on the draft technical paper and case studies.  Both working groups included participants from developing and  developed countries and addressed identical set of questions.  Working Group I (WG-I) was chaired by Holger Liptow (Germany) with  Susanne Haefeli (World Business Council for Sustainable  Development) as Rapporteur. Working Group II (WG-II) was chaired  by Kishan Kumarsingh (Trinidad and Tobago), with Richard Bradley  (US) as Rapporteur. Participants' discussions in the working  groups were reported to the plenary and are to provide inputs and  contribute to the final report of the workshop. The questions  raised in the two working groups, and participants responses, are  set out in the section below.

###     What are the key elements for creating enabling environments  conducive to transfer of ESTs, keeping in mind the various  dimensions possible?

Participants in WG-I made the following  points: governments have an important role to play in creating  enabling environments for the transfer of ESTs; policy actions can  be taken at macro, meso and micro levels; technology transfer  should be integrated into overall national development frameworks,  as well as broader environmental, economic, social and health  policies; technology transfer efforts should be directed at  adaptation as well as mitigation; both national and international  standards can enhance flows of technology transfer; and risk  reduction and management are important in creating enabling  environments.

Delegates in WG-II identified a number of key elements, including  the importance of: comprehensive awareness and involvement among  stakeholders; appropriate means for resolving stakeholders'  conflicting interests; links between sustained capacity building  and academic institutions; clear definitions of public and private  interests; and the incorporation of sustainable development goals  in policies and programmes.

###     What could governments do to identify the barriers to technology  transfer and the means to overcome these barriers?

WG-I  recommended a number of policy actions to support enabling  environments for technology transfer, including:needs assessments; evaluation of existing policies that influence the enabling  environment; intra-governmental coordination; protection of intellectual property rights and legal  contracts; political support for programmes and institutions that  support technology transfer; seed investment programmes to stimulate private sector  investment; and capacity building for major stakeholders.

Participants also discussed a proposal to place government actions  to identify and address barriers to technology transfer in a four- element framework focusing on clarity, consistency, transparency  and dissemination.

In WG-II, participants pointed out the need for, inter alia:greater communication and interaction between key ministries; delineation of the roles of the private and public sectors in  both developed and developing countries; economic incentives targeting industries that are not  currently participating in international trade; and ensuring that technology transfer initiatives are compatible  with national sustainable development agendas.

What role could other stakeholders - such as multilateral lending  institutions, bilateral programmes, NGOs, and the private sector -  play in creating an enabling environment for technology transfer?  WG-I participants responded to this question by highlighting,  inter alia, the engagement of multilateral and bilateral  implementing agencies, such as the GEF and regional institutions  in creating enabling environments for technology transfer; and  building the capacity of regional experts to support technology  transfer to least developed countries (LDCs).

WG-II stressed the need to identify different roles for each  stakeholder, foster awareness among donor agencies of the  environmental impacts of their projects, increase dialogue between  ministries and donor organizations, and promote cooperation  between NGOs and other stakeholders.

###     What role could international organizations such as the World  Trade Organization (WTO) and multilateral environment agreements  (MEAs) play in promoting enabling environments for technology  transfer? How could lessons learned from other MEAs be used in  creating enabling environments for technology transfer?

Participants in WG-I responded to these questions by underscoring  the overlap between technology transfer efforts under the UNFCCC  and other MEAs and recommending increased communication among  technology transfer bodies across various MEAs. They also  suggested further investigating the linkages between WTO rules on  trade regimes and technology transfer under the UNFCCC.

WG-II suggested, inter alia:increasing cooperation between the secretariats of MEAs to  identify synergies and avoid overlaps and duplication of effort; minimizing potential conflict between international  agreements, including the WTO and UNFCCC; enhancing dialogue and maximizing synergies between relevant  MEAs and organizations; and providing a forum for discussion and international  understanding of the interactions between environment and  socioeconomic issues.

###     Is there a common ground for the removal of barriers for  technology transfer in general, not only from an environmental  perspective, in both Annex I and non-Annex I Parties?

Participants  in WG-I acknowledged that developed and developing countries often  face similar barriers to market penetration. They suggested that  some actions to cultivate an enabling environment, particularly at  the macro level, may have benefits for the transfer of all  technologies, and not just for ESTs. They also considered ways to  ensure that actions be targeted at supporting the transfer of ESTs.

WG-II identified poverty alleviation as a common ground for the  removal of barriers for technology transfer within the context of  sustainable development.

###     What could the next steps be to address the issue of enabling  environments in the context of the UNFCCC process?

In WG-I,  participants advocated defining concrete actions as a follow-up to  the draft technical paper. Discussions in WG-II highlighted some  possible next steps, including:a high-level segment for discussing enabling environments at  the next COP; a workshop involving the secretariats of various MEAs and  other organizations; recognition of successful EST projects through awards; the organization of fora for the private sector to exchange  experience on ESTs; support and funding for the establishment of, and exchange  between, academic programmes in developing countries, and the  provision of scholarships for studies on climate change and ESTs  that are consistent with national technology transfer priorities;  and the enhancement of domestic educational programmes on climate  change and ESTs.

###     Can you identify concrete suggestions for improvement of the draft  technical paper?

Participants in WG-I suggested including or  embellishing the following elements:analysis of trends and common elements of technology transfer  across all sectors; examining failures and success stories, and methods of  replicating the latter; consideration of Parties' national communications to observe  the evolution of technology transfer under the UNFCCC; and increased attention to technology transfer for adaptation.

In WG-II, delegates suggested including a glossary of terms,  employing simpler language, and checking for accuracy.

# SYNERGIES AND CONSISTENCY BETWEEN UNFCCC ACTIVITIES AND OTHER  RELEVANT ORGANIZATIONS IN SUPPORTING ENABLING ENVIRONMENTS FOR  TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER

On Thursday afternoon, 10 April, delegates met in plenary to hear  presentations and engage in discussions on synergies and  consistency between the UNFCCC and other organizations. The  session was chaired by SBSTA Chair Halldor Thorgeirsson (Iceland).

Mark Radka, Energy Programme Coordinator for the Technology,  Industry, and Economics Division of the United Nations Environment  Programme (UNEP), expressed the opinion that there is generally a  high-level of consistency in the work of various agencies and  organizations on technology transfer related to climate change.  However, he noted that some overlap or duplication of work can  exist, particularly on more straightforward projects - for  instance, in the publication of handbooks on the CDM by several  different organizations. Regarding enabling environments for  technology transfer, he noted the limited number of potential  partners with the necessary expertise in developing countries, and  said this needs to be addressed.

Observing that 'synergy is not accidental,' Radka said technology  needs assessments should identify gaps in the enabling environment,  and that relevant organizations and agencies should help fill  these gaps. He suggested that the UNFCCC Secretariat could help  coordinate efforts to fill such gaps. He also highlighted the  importance of information sharing and awareness raising. Drawing  attention to the proposal made earlier in the meeting for a  workshop looking at enabling environments in the context of other  MEAs, he noted UNEP's expertise in this area, and its willingness  to be involved in organizing such a meeting.

Peter Pembleton, UNIDO, noted the need to develop synergies with  various MEAs and pointed out that each agency has different  mandates and deals with different stakeholders. He underscored  that there is scope for fostering synergies among secretariats and  suggested that synergies could be developed within each country.

Recognizing that technology plays a key role in the sustainable  growth of developing countries and EITs, Elmer Holt, CTI,  highlighted the essential role of the private sector in the long- term transfer of technology. He highlighted CTI's collaboration  with the GEF, UNDP, UNFCCC and UNEP on issues relating to country- driven technology needs assessment and essential measures to  foster the engagement of business and financial communities in  technology transfer. Holt underscored a variety of benefits of  collaborating with other MEAs, including: leveraging limited  financial and human resources on issues of common interest;  integrating and strengthening regional and country level  activities through information-sharing and joint activities; and  providing a platform for multilateral approaches and consistency  in technology transfer.

Florin Vladu, UNFCCC Secretariat, reported on the information on  enabling environments provided under the TT:CLEAR website, which  includes case studies from various countries and international  organizations, website addresses and links, and papers on  innovative capacities. He noted possible additional information  that the TT:CLEAR could provide for fostering enabling  environments, including additional information on certification,  equity consideration, social impacts and training, and links to  other clearinghouses. Janos Pasztor, UNFCCC Secretariat,  highlighted that governments have an important role to play in  enabling environments for technology transfer and described some  UNFCCC activities in organizing workshops and establishing the  TT:CLEAR. He noted that the ten dimensions of enabling  environments identified by the IPCC could provide a useful basis  for each participant to identify the means to contribute in  creating enabling environments for technology transfer. He also  highlighted the need to ensure coherence both within and outside  the UNFCCC.

### DISCUSSION

Highlighting the need for synergies beyond the UN  system, a participant from a developing country expressed concern  at the lack of involvement of the Bretton Woods institutions in  these discussions, especially given their impact on policy making  in developing and least developed countries. In response, Wanna  Tanunchaiwatana said representatives from the World Bank and other  organizations had been invited but were unable to attend, although  the GEF had sent some information to the UNFCCC Secretariat prior  to the meeting. Elmer Holt noted that the Bretton Woods  institutions had contributed to the consultative process, and said  he detected a growing environmental focus within those  institutions. Janos Pasztor said mainstreaming environment issues  in such institutions is happening gradually, although he would  prefer to see it occur more rapidly. He believed the WSSD and CSD  processes could assist in this mainstreaming exercise. Mark Radka  noted the funding limitations placed on the GEF, and suggested  that the SBSTA - through the EGTT - could recommend to the GEF  possible priority areas in terms of technology transfer and  enabling environments. He supported directing this funding towards  education, training and strengthening relevant institutions. One  developed country speaker noted that it is rare for governments to  direct one intergovernmental body to tell another  intergovernmental body what to do, and drew attention to  governance issues. However, he also observed that information  sharing with such institutions was fairly common. Janos Pasztor  noted that the UNFCCC is required to give guidance to the GEF on  funding priorities in relation to climate change.

Another developed country participant highlighted the value of  translating documents into multiple languages. Responding to this  comment, Mark Radka noted that, while this could be carried out  formally through the UN system, it is often more efficient and  cost effective for individual countries and organizations to take  the lead.

Reflecting on these discussions, Chair Thorgeirsson said the  climate change process is moving towards the mainstream and  placing the issue in a broader context, with the effect of  enhancing enabling environments.

# CLOSING SESSION

Participants heard closing statements on Thursday afternoon. EGTT  Chair William Agyemang-Bonsu thanked the UNFCCC staff for all  their efforts and all participants for their attendance,  especially COP-8 President T.R. Baalu. He also expressed his  appreciation to the Government of Belgium and other countries for  sponsoring this workshop, and thanked the Earth Negotiations  Bulletin for its accurate, detailed reporting on climate change  meetings.

Wanna Tanunchaiwatana, UNFCCC Secretariat, congratulated all EGTT  members, Chairs and Rapporteurs, Ghent University and local staff,  the UNFCCC technology team, and colleagues from UN agencies for  their support in this workshop. Chair Agyemang-Bonsu closed the  meeting at 5:18 pm.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR BEFORE COP-9

### 14TH ANNUAL EARTH TECHNOLOGIES FORUM (ETF)

This meeting will be  held from 22-24 April 2003, in Washington DC, United States. For  more information, contact: ETF; tel: +1-703-807-4052; fax: +1-703- 528-1734; e-mail: earthforum@alcalde-fay.com; Internet:  http://www.earthforum.com

### INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS ON RESTRUCTURING THE ENERGY SECTOR IN  TRANSITION COUNTRIES

This event will be held from 28-30 April  2003, in Leipzig, Germany, and is organized by Verbundnetz Gas AG,  Stadtwerke Leipzig and the World Bank. For more information,  contact: Pauline Massart; tel: +49-341-1492-393; fax: +49-341-91- 37-669; e-mail: p.massart@ombiasy.com; Internet:  http://www.restc.com

### 19TH LATIN AMERICAN CONFERENCE OF RURAL ELECTRIFICATION (CLER)

This meeting will be held from 5-10 May 2003, in Havana, Cuba. For  more information, contact the organizers at: tel: +537-202-7096;  fax: 537-202-9372; e-mail: cler@geprop.cu; Internet:  http://www.geprop.cu/cler/cler.htm

### EUROPEAN REGIONAL WORKSHOP ON THE NEW DELHI WORK PROGRAMME ON  UNFCCC ARTICLE 6

This workshop will be held from 6-8 May 2003, in  Le Grand Hornu, Belgium. For more information, contact: UNFCCC  Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail:  secretariat@unfccc.int; Internet:  http://unfccc.int/sessions/workshop/060503/index.html

### INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON ENERGY AND THE ENVIRONMENT (ICEE)

This event is being organized by the University of Shanghai for  Science and Technology and George Washington University and will  be held from 22-24 May 2003, in Shanghai, China. For more  information, contact: Daoping Liu; tel: +86-21-6568-9564; fax:  +86-21-6568-0843; e-mail: dpliu@online.sh.cn; Internet:  http://www.gwu.edu/%7Eeem/ICEE/firstpagenew.htm

### UNFCCC EXPERT GROUP ON TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER (EGTT)

The third  meeting of the EGTT will be held from 30-31 May 2003, in Bonn,  Germany. For more information, contact: UNFCCC Secretariat; tel:  +49-228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail:  secretariat@unfccc.int; Internet: http://www.unfccc.int

### 18TH SESSIONS OF THE UNFCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES (SB-18)

The  Subsidiary Body for Implementation and the Subsidiary Body for  Scientific and Technological Advice will meet from 4-13 June 2003,  in Bonn, Germany. For more information, contact: UNFCCC  Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail:  secretariat@unfccc.int; Internet:  http://unfccc.int/sessions/sb18/index.html

### INTERNATIONAL SOLAR ENERGY SOCIETY (ISES) SOLAR WORLD CONGRESS  2003

This congress will be held from 14-19 June 2003, in  Götenborg, Sweden. For more information, contact: ISES; tel: +46- 31-81-8220; fax: +46-31-81-8225; e-mail: ISES2003@gbg.congrex.se;  Internet: http://www.congrex.com/ISES2003/

### THE THIRD WORLD CONFERENCE ON CLIMATE CHANGE

This conference will  be held from 29 September-3 October 2003, in Moscow, Russian  Federation. For more information, contact: Conference Secretariat;  tel: +95-252-0708; fax: +95-252-0708; e-mail: wccc2003@mecom.ru;  Internet: http://www.meteo.ru/wccc2003/econc.htm

### UNFCCC COP-9

The ninth Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC  will be held from 1-12 December 2003, in Milan, Italy. For more  information, contact: UNFCCC Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815-1000;  fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.int; Internet:  http://www.unfccc.int/