---
title: "HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE FOURTH UNFCCC CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES, 4 NOVEMBER 1998"
id: enb1290e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1290e
date: 1998-11-04
abstract: "The Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice  (SBSTA) and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI)  considered the Kyoto Protocol's flexibility mechanisms in a  joint plenary and contact group. SBSTA debated development and  transfer of technology, and research and systematic observation.  SBI considered national communications, the financial mechanism  and amendments to the FCCC Annexes."
---

# SBSTA/SBI JOINT SESSION

The SBI and SBSTA discussed the Protocol's flexibility  mechanisms (FCCC/1998/CP/MISC.7 and Add.1; FCCC/SBSTA/1998/6;  FCCC/CP/1998/INF.3). The G-77/CHINA reiterated the need for the  flexibility mechanisms to proceed step-by-step. MEXICO said  quotas on implementation would be inappropriate and flexibility  on sustainable development criteria is required. BRAZIL said the  CDM should not be operational before ratification of the  Protocol and implementation of domestic measures. AOSIS stated,  inter alia, that supplementarity should be the essential guiding  concept for the mechanisms.

The AFRICAN GROUP stressed that the use of flexible mechanisms  be limited to an agreed amount since the primary objective of  FCCC was to encourage domestic action. Appropriate work with  debt relief in Africa would create an enabling environment for a  wide range of CDM projects. He called for a preparatory process  to enable African countries to undertake CDM projects. He  stressed the importance of equity in the CDM and suggested  focusing on infrastructure development in the continent.

The EU stated that the mechanisms should be developed parallel  to and consistent with each other. He said domestic actions  should be the primary means of emissions reductions and the  mechanisms should be supplemental. He called for the definition  of a quantitative and qualitative ceiling based on equitable  terms. SWITZERLAND suggested the creation of a compliance  mechanism. The EU, SWITZERLAND and SLOVENIA said COP-4 should  agree on as many principles as possible and adopt detailed  schedules on enacting the Kyoto Protocol. AUSTRALIA said the  flexibility mechanisms were to be open, market-based,  transparent, cost effective and equitable; provide comprehensive  coverage, including sinks; and be fungible. With NEW ZEALAND,  she opposed restrictions on trade in assigned amounts,  characterizing them as inequitable, costly, arbitrary and  difficult to implement.

With CANADA, the US and NORWAY, JAPAN underscored the importance  of: addressing the flexibility mechanisms in parallel, reaching  early agreement; and developing a work plan for unresolved  issues. He favored giving priority to technical issues.  Supported by CANADA and the US, he opposed quantitative ceilings  for reductions achieved through the flexibility mechanisms,  noting there is no ceiling on transfers of assigned amounts  under Protocol Article 4 ('bubble'). On the CDM, he favored:  transparency; inclusion of sink projects; private sector  involvement; use of public funds to ensure equitable  geographical distribution of projects; and a standardized and/or  project-by-project approach for baselines. With CANADA, he said  host countries should determine sustainable development  criteria.

CANADA said the adaptation fee should be minimal and  predictable. The US underscored the importance of meeting  targets at the lowest cost to sustain public support. The  REPUBLIC OF KOREA said the private sector could only embark on  long-term planning once details for operationalizing the CDM are  elaborated. Yvo De Boer (Netherlands) and Luis Gylvan Meira  Filho (Brazil) will co-chair a joint contact group on  mechanisms.

# SBI

Delegates considered the review of information and possible  decisions under Article 4.2(f), which addresses amendments to  FCCC Annexes (FCCC/CP/1998/13; FCCC/CP/1997/MISC.3). The Chair  recalled that informal consultations were held during the last  two sessions but no consensus emerged. PAKISTAN requested  Parties to delete Turkey from Annex I. TURKEY said it remained  unable to sign the FCCC while in Annex I. The EU said all OECD  countries should have legally binding targets. Informal  consultations will be held .

On the second compilation and synthesis of second national  communications from Annex I Parties, the Secretariat provided a  review of documentation and discussed gaps in data and reporting  (FCCC/CP/1998/11; FCCC/CP/1998/11.Add.1; FCCC/CP/1998/11.Add.2).  The debate included reference to the in-depth review process and  the proposal for an exercise of data comparison (FCCC/CP/1998/4;  FCCC/CP/1998/5; FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.8; FCCC/CP/1998/INF.9). The G-77/CHINA, with the PHILIPPINES and CHINA, expressed concern  about: increasing emission trends among Annex II Parties;  activities relating to financial resources and technology  transfer; the lack of progress in the development of policies  and measures; and gaps in reporting by Annex I Parties.

NORWAY, with the EU, AUSTRALIA, the US and CANADA, stated that:  the national communications and their review were important to  the Convention process; reporting issues and guidelines require  increased attention; and the Secretariat should conduct more  analytical work. The EU, NEW ZEALAND, the US, SWITZERLAND,  CANADA and NORWAY said the third national communication should  be due in 2001. The EU, NORWAY and the US supported the  Secretariat's proposed paper on comparison of activity data, but  sought clarification on several technical and procedural issues.  A contact group co-chaired by Alexander Metalnikov (Russian  Federation) and Mahmoud El Gaouth (Mauritania) will consider the  issue.

On national communications from non-Annex I countries  (FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.4; FCCC/CP/1998/INF.2; FCCC/CP/1998/CRP.1),  the PHILIPPINES highlighted the need for capacity building and  financing, which should follow the guidelines for initial  communications in Decision 10/CP.2. CHINA, supported by TOGO and  CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC, said the decision recognized the need  for adequate and additional financial resources for inventories,  an enormous task for some developing countries. CHILE and  COLOMBIA described ongoing efforts toward their initial national  communications. URUGUAY and KOREA described their initial  communications and national efforts underway to limit GHGs.

The EU said communications should be considered on a country- level basis and more frequent workshops would be beneficial.  SWITZERLAND and AUSTRALIA underscored that non-Annex I  communications undergo a review process similar to Annex I. Dan  Reifsnyder (US) will chair a contact group on this issue.

Delegates debated the Report on the Global Environmental  Facility (GEF) (FCCC/CP/1998/12; FCCC/CP/1998/12.Add.1;  FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.3) the financial mechanism and the review  process (FCCC/SBI/1998/MISC.4, FCCC/SBI/1998/MISC.4.Add.1;  FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.3). Several developing country Parties  suggested a political reorientation of the GEF to meet their  needs, such as the continuation of non-Annex I communications.   Several developed country Parties suggested that GEF should  operate as the Convention's financial entity, although  improvements are needed. Chair Kante called for unity among the  delegates to resolve the status of the GEF and appealed for a  solution. John Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda) and Dan Reifsnyder  (US) will chair a contact group.

Regarding the second review of the adequacy of Article 4.2(a)  and (b) (FCCC/CP/1997/7; FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.6;  FCCC/CP/1998/MISC./Add.1), there was consensus among Parties  that the current commitments were inadequate and a decision  should be reached at COP-4. The G-77/CHINA and several  developing countries said: the issue is important to the  Convention; a clear decision defining new commitments needs to  be reached; and developed countries were shirking their  responsibilities in this matter. Several developed countries  indicated that a resolution of this issue is possible at COP-4,  but a decision should be forward-looking and create an enabling  framework that could include a broader range of commitments. A  contact group will consider the issue. After consultations, the  SBI decided to postpone a decision on Turkey's Annex I status  until COP-5.

# SBSTA

SBSTA considered development and transfer of technologies, and  research and systematic observation (FCCC/CP/1998/6;  FCCC/CP/1998.MISC.5 and Add 1-2; FCCC/TP/1998/1;  FCCC/1998/CP/11.Add.1). CLIMATE TECHNOLOGY INITIATIVE (CTI) said  it aims at fostering international cooperation to accelerate the  diffusion and development of climate-friendly technology and  practices. JAPAN described its programme with China and its  regional Internet-based climate change network. The EU requested  the Secretariat to examine ways to complement technical  cooperation with technological transfer.

The G-77/CHINA said without practical technical know-how,  technology transfer would be impossible. SENEGAL said if  developing countries were to meet their commitments, capacity  development should accompany technology transfer. The US opposed  the G-77/China proposal for a new technology transfer mechanism  as it would be difficult to agree on its terms of reference.  ARGENTINA, with AOSIS, stressed the need to consider adaptation  as well as mitigation. He supported a role for the Secretariat  in linking providers and receivers of technology and for  international organizations in providing resources.

With GRENADA and KOREA, CHINA emphasized the role of national  governments and international organizations and said technology  transfer should be on non-commercial and preferential terms. She  added that transfer of technology relates to the Convention and  should not be linked to the Kyoto Protocol. She questioned  assessment of experiences, noting minimal progress in technology  transfer since 1992, and favored focusing on existing  technologies over assessment of emerging technologies.

Noting the need for an enabling environment and the potential of  the CDM, CANADA and AUSTRALIA said the private sector should be  the main vehicle for technology transfer. KOREA and CANADA  supported work on inventories for sources of new technologies  and gap identification. AUSTRALIA supported analysis of barriers  to technology transfer and suggested SBSTA draw on its roster of  experts.  He proposed the establishment of an Internet-based  network to enhance information dissemination.

With the US, KOREA said debates on conceptual issues should not  impede progress of the work programme. The US added that  technology transfer should be practical, sector-specific and  driven by country priorities. He proposed that the Secretariat  prepare a report on technology transfer and development efforts  by Parties for consideration by SBSTA at its next session and  endorsed the Secretariat's proposal to establish a consultative  process to develop consensus on next steps. IRAN favored  encouraging participation of government and private industries  in technology transfer.

MALAYSIA expressed disappointment at the lack of progress over  the last few years and called for developed nations to establish  information centers. RÉSEAU ACTION CLIMAT proposed that  technologies be accompanied by 'least cost evaluations,' i.e.  accounting of cultural, financial and other costs. He called for  locally adapted technology transfer. A contact group chaired by  Wanna Tanunchaiwatana (Thailand) and Renata Christ (EC) was  convened to discuss the issue.

On Research and Systematic Observation, Global Climate Observing  Systems (GCOS) presented a Report on the Adequacy of Global  Climate Observing Systems. It recommends, inter alia, that  Parties prepare national plans and exchange of relevant data.  The Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS) also made a  presentation.

WMO highlighted problems with the quality and frequency of  observations, and spatial gaps over some climatically important  areas. Supported by several Parties and UNEP, he underscored  capacity building, financial assistance, and improved climate  observation and monitoring. AUSTRALIA supported the  recommendations of the GCOS Report. ICELAND called for increased  efforts to enhance observational capacity over oceans. Noting  the emerging consensus to address the degradation of observatory  systems, the Chair proposed informal consultations chaired by  Dr. Sue Barrell (Australia) and Dr. Mohammed Mhita (Tanzania).

# JOINT CONTACT GROUP ON FLEXIBILITY MECHANISMS

The joint contact group discussed the preparation of a  comprehensive work programme on flexibility mechanisms. The EU  and the 'Umbrella Group' distributed draft decisions and  discussion documents. Other Parties, including G-77/CHINA,  called for more time to consider the volume of documentation.  Several developing country Parties supported addressing a wider  range of issues related to the flexibility mechanisms, including  technology transfer, adverse impacts, methodologies, reporting  and compliance. Two small island states supported a package of  11 themes for the work programme. The Chairs distributed a  'dummy' Draft Work Programme on Mechanisms and will conduct  informal consultations.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### JOINT SBI/SBSTA SESSION

The joint session will meet in Plenary  I at 10:00 am.