---
title: "HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE UNFCCC FOURTH CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES, 3 NOVEMBER 1998"
id: enb1289e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1289e
date: 1998-11-03
abstract: "The Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice  (SBSTA) discussed matters related to land-use change and  forestry (LUCF) and considered a draft decision on single  projects. The Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI)  deliberated organizational matters and convened a contact group  on implementation of Articles 4.8 and 4.9 of the Convention  (decision 3/CP.3 and Articles 2.3 and 3.14 of the Kyoto  Protocol). A joint SBSTA/SBI focused on, inter alia, matters  related to the Kyoto Protocol's flexibility mechanisms."
---

# SBSTA

SBSTA Chair Kok Kee Chow (Malaysia) reminded delegates that  several key issues, inter alia, the development and transfer of  technology and the mechanisms of the Kyoto Protocol had been  referred to SBSTA. IPCC Chair Robert Watson briefed SBSTA on the  status of the Third Assessment Report (TAR) and four IPCC  special reports. He said the TAR, which will be comprehensive  and cover the complete range of scientific, technical, economic  and social issues associated with climate change, will be policy  relevant but not policy prescriptive. He said the philosophy of  the TAR would embrace the concept of sustainable development and  would attempt to place the issue of climate change more  centrally within the socio-economic context. Issues of  particular policy relevance would include, inter alia, the links  between local, regional and global environmental issues and the  trade impacts of the ratified Kyoto Protocol.

The Special Reports on aviation and the global atmosphere,  methodological and technological aspects of technology transfer  and emissions scenarios of greenhouse gases and aerosol  precursors will be finalized in April 1999, the end of 1999 and  early 2000 respectively. The Special Report on LUCF, required to  operationalize the relevant articles of the Kyoto Protocol, will  be completed by May 2000. He stressed the necessity for  enhancement of scientific and technological infrastructure in  developing countries. The Secretariat introduced the documents  related to LUCF (FCCC/CP/1998/INF.4; FCCC/CP/1998/MISC. 1 and  Add.1; FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.9 and Add.1).

Paul Maclons (South Africa) and Maciej Sadowski (Poland)  reported on a recent workshop they co-chaired at the request of  SBSTA-8. The workshop focused on data availability based on  definitions used by Parties and international organizations,  including their implications, in relation to Kyoto Protocol  Article 3.3 (forests). The workshop coincided with an IPCC  expert meeting that aimed to prepare an outline for the special  report. The Co-Chairs noted that SBSTA may need to clarify  whether and when the IPCC should develop detailed tables,  formats and instructions for addressing the implications of the  Kyoto Protocol on the Revised Guidelines for national greenhouse  gas (GHG) inventories.

FAO reported on its recent activities related to climate change.  UGANDA stressed the need for comprehensive discussion of FCCC  Articles 5 and 6 (public awareness) at the political, technical  and grassroots level. BRAZIL underscored that SBSTA must look at  forestry issues from the perspective of climate change. He noted  that this issue alone could undermine the Kyoto Protocol if the  COP takes a wrong decision on how to account for its influence  on GHG concentrations.

NORWAY said the workshop revealed that credits for carbon sinks  under Protocol Article 3.3 (forests) might be negative, while  the forest, as a whole, remains a sink. He said it was important  that the discussions on definitions take this into account.  SWITZERLAND, with the MARSHALL ISLANDS, favored deferring work  related to Articles 3.3 and 3.4 (agricultural soils) until the  IPCC special report is available. CANADA highlighted the  capacity of soils to sequester carbon and noted the opportunity  this presented to farmers in pursuing sustainable land  management practices. With ICELAND, AUSTRALIA and JAPAN, he  supported the US offer to host a SBSTA workshop in 1999. ICELAND  favored continuing SBSTA's dialogue on sinks, focusing on, inter  alia: selection criteria for additional activities, and  modalities, rules and guidelines for the implementation of  Protocol Article 3.4.

MAURITIUS said reduction of anthropogenic emissions should not  be forgotten when discussing sinks. The PHILIPPINES, the  MARSHALL ISLANDS and ARGENTINA supported an increase in the IPCC  budget to ensure full participation by developing country  experts. The EU suggested preparation of a timeframe for the  submission of the special report of the IPCC. INDONESIA  suggested linking the issue of LUCF in the Protocol to other  international environmental agreements, such as the Convention  on Biological Diversity. MEXICO stressed the need to examine  links between local, regional and global environmental issues.  BARBADOS said science should guide the COP on LUCF. GREENPEACE  said the IPCC should examine the possibility that certain  definitional judgements may result in perverse or negative  incentives. The IPCC Chair assured delegates that their concerns  would be taken into account in preparing the report.

The US questioned the IPCC on the relationship between the  Convention and the Montreal Protocol processes. He underscored  the ancillary benefits of sequestration activities and said  excluding these would violate the Convention. AUSTRALIA said  SBSTA's work on LUCF should be parallel to and linked with the  IPCC's work. He said SBSTA-9 should develop a draft decision for  COP-4 elaborating a work plan for development of modalities,  rules and guidelines relating to LUCF. JAPAN submitted two  papers relating to Articles 3.3 and 3.4 containing items to be  examined and supporting the work schedule agreed at SBSTA-8.

ICELAND submitted a draft decision that provides for process  emissions from a single project, coming into operation after  1990 and contributing more than five percent, in the first  commitment period, to the total greenhouse gas emissions of an  Annex B Party, to be reported separately and not in the national  totals. This would allow the party to exceed its assigned amount  provided that the total emissions of the Party are less than  0.05% of Annex I emissions in 1990. Iceland said this was  necessary in small economies, as the proportional impact of  single projects is very high.

MARSHALL ISLANDS, supported by BRAZIL, BARBADOS and TUVALU, said  the draft decision would lead to special dispensations prior to  the Kyoto Protocol's entry into force and could create an  incentive for emissions increases in Annex I countries. With  AUSTRIA, CANADA and BARBADOS, he requested more time for  consultations. AUSTRALIA recognized the impact of special  projects on small economies and supported establishing  guidelines and methodologies to specify circumstances under  which special projects could be accommodated. CANADA and BRAZIL  said the draft decision could set a precedent affecting the  integrity of the Protocol. BRAZIL noted that the Kyoto Protocol  provides for mechanisms enabling Annex I Parties to seek lower- cost alternatives for emission reductions.

The US said the differentiation in assigned amounts in the  Protocol allows for differences in national circumstances. He  stated that Iceland's draft decision was consistent with the  Protocol. ICELAND noted that this issue was identified at COP-3,  and raised it now to facilitate its ratification of the  Protocol. He distinguished between significant proportional  impacts resulting from planned projects, and unexpected events.  The Chair asked Ole Ploughmann (Denmark) to conduct  consultations and prepare a draft decision for SBSTA.

ANTIGUA and BARBUDA opposed the idea of exceptions to the Kyoto  Protocol. The Chair said he would hold informal discussions to  come up with an acceptable draft conclusion.

On the Scientific and Methodological Aspects of the Proposal  from Brazil, BRAZIL described it as the allocation of  responsibilities among different emitters based on their actions  as measured by the increase in global temperatures rather than  by emissions. INDONESIA supported discussion of the issue.  GEORGIA stressed that monitoring of GHGs needed enhancement. The  US said that using temperature change as the sole indicator of  responsibility ignored relevant socio-economic factors. The EU  supported the 'thoughtful' Brazilian proposal.

# SBI

The Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) deliberated  organizational matters and matters referred to the SBI by the  COP. Chair Bakary Kante noted that there were many items to be  resolved by 10 November. Regarding the organization of work, the  Chair said advance schedules would be provided. The Secretariat  outlined a number of administrative and financial matters  (FCCC/CP/1998/8/Add.1; FCCC/CP/1998/9; FCCC/CP/1998/10 and  FCCC/CP/1998/INF.1). A brief discussion ensued and the Chair  decided to hold consultations on the issues that were raised.

On the schedule of meetings for 2000-2001, the EU, supported by  CANADA and AUSTRALIA, proposed that COP-5 be held in 2000 rather  than 1999. With SAUDI ARABIA, CHINA, VENEZUELA and NIGERIA,  MAURITANIA objected to this proposal. If the COP is postponed,  he said governments might not feel the pressure to ratify the  Protocol. CHINA noted that several issues under the Convention  remain unresolved and time is needed to prepare for the  Protocol's entry into force. NIGERIA objected to the US proposal  for alternating ministerial and non-ministerial COPs. CANADA  called for consultations on this issue under the guidance of the  Chair.

Regarding the contact group convened to consider FCCC Articles  4.8 and 4.9 (adverse effects) and the related articles of the  Kyoto Protocol (2.3 and 3.14), SAUDI ARABIA stressed the need  for an unambiguous text that could be adopted by the COP.  MAURITANIA called on the Secretariat to provide more detailed  information regarding the Parties that provide and receive  funds. BOLIVIA suggested a mandate be given to the Secretariat  to investigate current practice under Articles 4.8 and 4.9. The  US and CANADA indicated that the issues raised by Articles 4.8  and 4.9 and the subsequent decisions should be separate. With  AUSTRALIA, they said the issue should be considered in a non- political manner. The EU acknowledged the concerns of developing  countries and suggested prioritizing the development of  effective mitigation measures and the compilation of technical  information.

# JOINT SBI/SBSTA SESSION

The joint SBI/SBSTA session considered the status of the  Activities Implemented Jointly (AIJ) pilot phase. The  Secretariat provided a report on the 95 projects, the main  methodological issues, and subjects that arose in workshops on  this topic (FCCC/CP/1998/2, FCCC/CP/1998/INF.3,  FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.7 and FCCC/CP/1998/MISC7.add1).

The G-77/CHINA, supported by several developing countries,  observed that AIJ is separate from the mechanisms arising from  the Protocol. He said that while the number of projects  increased, representation is poor. He stated that there were  insufficient details to draw conclusions and the pilot phase  should be extended. Most non-Annex I Parties have not  experienced and evaluated an AIJ project within their own  country. Several Parties observed that further experience and  capacity building would lay the groundwork on Protocol  mechanisms.

SWITZERLAND, with NORWAY, JAPAN, SLOVENIA, the EU, the US,  AUSTRALIA and COLOMBIA, contended that the AIJ pilot phase  provided lessons for the flexibility mechanisms. A review of the  AIJ pilot phase for COP-5 will support the development of this  work. POLAND observed that a review of the process could explain  why some countries are excluded and resolve some of the concerns  of the G-77/CHINA. After an extensive debate, the co-chairs  indicated that informal negotiations would be held on this  matter.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

Some NGO observers reported hints of a 'hostile negotiating  climate' when a number of developing countries resisted an  immediate review of the AIJ pilot phase and called for an  extension. Some developing country delegates explained they were  determined to hold out for an extension of the pilot phase to  allow more countries to gain experience prior to the  implementation of the CDM. One NGO observer suggested, however,  that the US may pay a high price for its position on voluntary  commitments if the flexibility mechanisms are delayed. This  could result in uncertainty about Annex B Parties' commitment to  the Protocol and their preparedness to tackle GHG emissions.  Ironically, it could defer the conditions for developing  countries to assume voluntary commitments.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR

### JOINT SBI/SBSTA SESSION

The joint session will meet at 10:00 am  in Plenary I.