---
title: "INFORMAL EXCHANGE OF VIEWS AND INFORMATION ON COMPLIANCE UNDER THE KYOTO PROTOCOL: 6-7 OCTOBER 1999"
id: enb12111e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12111e
date: 1999-10-07
abstract: "The informal exchange of views and information on compliance under  the Kyoto Protocol to the Framework Convention on Climate Change  (FCCC) was held from 6-7 October 1999 at the Diplomatische  Akademie in Vienna, Austria. The informal exchange was designed to  facilitate deliberations on the development of a compliance system  under the Kyoto Protocol. The workshop was organized by the  Austrian Government in cooperation with the FCCC Secretariat and  the Co-Chairs of the Joint Working Group on Compliance (JWG).  Ninety-seven participants attended the meeting, including experts,  representatives from governments, UN agencies, and  intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations. Participants  met in several sessions over two days to hear presentations from  experts and discuss various issues related to compliance,  including: compliance regimes under the Montreal Protocol, the  Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution (LRTAP) and  its protocols, the International Labour Organization (ILO) and the  World Trade Organization (WTO); institutional issues such as  facilitative and enforcement functions, eligibility to raise  issues and information gathering; and issues related to the  consequences of non-compliance. The Co-Chairs of the JWG will  prepare a non-paper on elements of a compliance system based on  discussions held during the workshop to be presented to the fifth  Conference of the Parties to the FCCC."
---

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FCCC AND THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change was  adopted on 9 May 1992, and was opened for signature at the UN  Conference on Environment and Development in June 1992. The  Convention entered into force on 21 March 1994, 90 days after  receipt of the 50th ratification. It has currently been ratified  by 179 countries.

### COP-1

The first meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the  FCCC (COP-1) took place in Berlin from 28 March - 7 April 1995. In  addition to addressing a number of important issues related to the  future of the Convention, delegates reached agreement on what many  believed to be the central issue before COP-1 - adequacy of  commitments, the 'Berlin Mandate.' Delegates agreed to establish  an open-ended Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate (AGBM) to begin a  process toward appropriate action for the period beyond 2000,  including the strengthening of the commitments of Annex I Parties  through the adoption of a protocol or another legal instrument.  COP-1 also requested the Secretariat to make arrangements for  sessions of the subsidiary bodies on scientific and technological  advice (SBSTA) and implementation (SBI). SBSTA serves as the link  between the information provided by competent international  bodies, and the policy-oriented needs of the COP. During the AGBM  process, SBSTA addressed several issues, including the treatment  of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's (IPCC) Second  Assessment Report (SAR). SBI was created to develop  recommendations to assist the COP in the review and assessment of  the implementation of the Convention and in the preparation and  implementation of its decisions. SBI addressed several key issues  during the AGBM process, such as national communications and  activities implemented jointly.

Ad Hoc GROUP ON ARTICLE 13: AG13 was set up to consider the  establishment of a multilateral consultative process available to  Parties to resolve questions on implementation. AG13-1, held from  30-31 October 1995 in Geneva, decided to request Parties, non- Parties, and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations  to make written submissions in response to a questionnaire on a  multilateral consultative process (MCP).

Delegates continued their discussion over the course of three  meetings. At their fifth session, they agreed that the MCP should  be advisory rather than supervisory in nature and AG13 should  complete its work by COP-4.

Ad Hoc GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE: The AGBM met eight times  between August 1995 and COP-3 in December 1997. During the first  three sessions, delegates focused on analyzing and assessing  possible policies and measures to strengthen the commitments of  Annex I Parties, how Annex I countries might distribute or share  new commitments and whether commitments should take the form of an  amendment or protocol. AGBM-4, which coincided with COP-2 in  Geneva in July 1996, completed its in-depth analysis of the likely  elements of a protocol and States appeared ready to prepare a  negotiating text. At AGBM-5, which met in December 1996, delegates  recognized the need to decide whether or not to allow mechanisms  that would provide Annex I Parties with flexibility in meeting  quantified emissions limitation and reduction objectives (QELROs).

As the protocol was drafted during the sixth and seventh sessions  of the AGBM, in March and August 1997, respectively, delegates  'streamlined' a framework compilation text by merging or  eliminating some overlapping provisions within the myriad of  proposals. Much of the discussion centered on a proposal from the  EU for a 15% cut in a 'basket' of three greenhouse gases by the  year 2010 compared to 1990 emission levels. In October 1997, as  AGBM-8 began, US President Bill Clinton included a call for  'meaningful participation' by developing countries in the  negotiating position he announced in Washington. The insistence on  G-77/China involvement was linked to the level of ambition  acceptable by the US and in response, the G-77/China distanced  itself from attempts to draw developing countries into agreeing to  anything that could be interpreted as new commitments.

### COP-3

The Third Conference of the Parties (COP-3) was held from  1-11 December 1997 in Kyoto, Japan. Over 10,000 participants,  including representatives from governments, intergovernmental  organizations, NGOs and the media, attended the Conference, which  included a high-level segment featuring statements from over 125  ministers. Following a week and a half of intense formal and  informal negotiations, including a session that began on the final  evening and lasted into the following day, Parties to the FCCC  adopted the Kyoto Protocol on 11 December. In the Kyoto Protocol,  Annex I Parties to the FCCC agreed to commitments with a view to  reducing their overall emissions of six greenhouse gases (GHGs) by  at least 5% below 1990 levels between 2008 and 2012. The Protocol  also established emissions trading, 'joint implementation' between  developed countries, and a 'clean development mechanism' (CDM) to  encourage joint emissions reduction projects between developed and  developing countries. To date, 84 countries have signed and 14  have ratified the Kyoto Protocol. The Protocol will enter into  force 90 days after it is ratified by 55 States, including Annex I  parties representing at least 55% per cent of the total carbon  dioxide emissions for 1990.

Post-Kyoto subsidiary bodies Meetings: The subsidiary bodies of  the FCCC met from 2-12 June 1998 in Bonn, Germany. SBSTA-8 agreed  to draft conclusions on, inter alia, cooperation with relevant  international organizations, methodological issues, and education  and training. SBI-8 reached conclusions on, inter alia, national  communications, the financial mechanism and the second review of  adequacy of Annex I Party commitments.

In its sixth session, AG13 concluded its work on the functions of  the MCP. After joint SBI/SBSTA consideration and extensive contact  group debates on the flexibility mechanisms, delegates could only  agree to a compilation document containing proposals from the G-77/China, the EU and the US on the issues for discussion and  frameworks for implementation.

### COP-4

The Fourth Conference of the Parties (COP-4) was held from  2-13 November 1998 in Buenos Aires, Argentina, with over 5,000  participants in attendance. During the two-week meeting, delegates  deliberated decisions for the COP during SBI-9 and SBSTA-9. Issues  related to the Kyoto Protocol were considered in joint SBI/SBSTA  sessions. A high-level segment, that heard statements from over  100 ministers and heads of delegation, was convened on Thursday,  12 November. Following hours of high-level 'closed door'  negotiations and a final plenary session that concluded early  Saturday morning, delegates adopted the Buenos Aires Plan of  Action. Under the Plan of Action, the Parties declared their  determination to strengthen the implementation of the Convention  and prepare for the future entry into force of the Kyoto Protocol.  The Plan contains the Parties' resolution to demonstrate  substantial progress on: the financial mechanism; the development  and transfer of technology; the implementation of FCCC Articles  4.8 and 4.9, as well as Protocol Articles 2.3 and 3.14; activities  implemented jointly (AIJ); the mechanisms of the Kyoto Protocol;  and the preparations for the first Meeting of the Parties  (COP/MOP-1).

### SBI-10 AND SBSTA-10

The subsidiary bodies to the FCCC held their  tenth sessions in Bonn, Germany, from 31 May - 11 June 1999, and  began the process of fulfilling the Buenos Aires Plan of Action.  The SBSTA considered topics such as Annex I communications,  methodological issues and the development and transfer of  technology. The SBI discussed, inter alia, administrative and  financial matters and non-Annex I communications. SBI and SBSTA  jointly considered the mechanisms of the Kyoto Protocol,  activities implemented jointly and compliance. A joint SBI/SBSTA  working group on compliance (JWG) discussed identification of  compliance-related elements, including gaps and suitable forums to  address them; design of a compliance system; and consequences of  non-compliance. The JWG resolved to hold a workshop to facilitate  informal exchange of views on relevant issues, including  experiences under other conventions. The Co-Chairs were asked to  make a factual, informal report, with no recommendations, on this  workshop to COP-5.

# REPORT OF THE WORKSHOP

The informal exchange of views and information on compliance under  the Kyoto Protocol was opened by Amb. Ernst Sucharipa, Director of  the Diplomatische Akademie, on Wednesday, 6 October 1999. Co-Chair  Harald Dovland reminded participants that the JWG had agreed  during the tenth session of the subsidiary bodies that the  workshop would be designed merely to facilitate exchange of  information and views. On organization of work, he said delegates  would be recognized by their name not their country. He outlined  the agenda for the sessions, as agreed upon in the JWG: four  presentations on compliance regimes in other bodies; a question  and answer session; a presentation by Peter Sand on compliance  systems under international treaties; and an informal exchange of  views.

## EXCHANGE OF VIEWS AND INFORMATION RELATED TO RELEVANT EXPERIENCE  IN OTHER CONVENTIONS

### PRESENTATIONS

The workshop participants first heard four  presentations on compliance regimes in other bodies.

Madhava Sarma, Executive Secretary of the Montreal Protocol,  provided an overview of Montreal Protocol provisions that relate  to Parties' obligations, reporting of data and the non-compliance  procedure. He identified the major obligations of Parties as,  inter alia, control measures for the phase out of 95 chemicals;  control of trade with Parties and non-Parties; reporting of data;  and transfer of technology. Compliance with the control measures  is monitored through the analysis of reports presented by the  Parties. Parties are obliged to submit data to the Secretariat to  the extent that they have ratified the respective amendments.  Although data is accepted from Parties, as reported, verification  is possible through the work of the implementing agencies of the  Multilateral Fund such as the United Nations Development Programme  (UNDP), United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the World  Bank and the Global Environment Facility (GEF).

Sarma said the non-compliance procedure could be triggered by: one  Party expressing a reservation regarding another Party's  compliance; the Secretariat's observations in its report on data;  and a Party submitting an explanation of its non-compliance to the  Secretariat. An implementing committee created by the Meeting of  the Parties (MOP) will consider representations before it, gather  information and prepare recommendations to the MOP, which is the  final authority on non-compliance issues. In 1992 the Parties  decided on an indicative list of measures that may be taken by the  MOP in case of non-compliance. These include: providing  appropriate assistance, issuing cautions, and suspending specific  rights and privileges under the Protocol.

Sarma stressed that this procedure is based on the presumption  that all Parties wish to implement the Protocol and that their  inability to comply is due to a problem that the international  community should assist in solving. In conclusion he suggested  that the Kyoto Protocol consider two types of procedures for non- compliance - a facilitative, non-confrontational and assistance  based procedure for determining non-compliance in all cases and a  legal procedure where the non-compliance is determined to be  'willful.' Henning Wuester, United Nations Economic Commission for Europe  (UNECE), explained that the common compliance regime adopted in  1997 for the Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution  (LRTAP) and its eight Protocols was under revision. He outlined  the four basic functions of the compliance committee: conducting  periodic reviews of reporting requirements; considering specific  issues referred to it by one or more Parties about another Party,  one Party on its own compliance problems, or the Secretariat based  upon information received by Parties or other sources such as  NGOs; examining the quality of data; and reporting on the  implementation of specific obligations at the request of the  Executive Body.

On access to information, he specified that the compliance  committee could: gather information from the Secretariat or other  sources through the Secretariat; get expert advice from the  Convention bodies or other experts; and visit countries by  invitation. Wuester explained that Parties had to submit two types  of reports based on a framework common to the Convention and its  Protocols - one on strategies and policies adopted to mitigate air  pollution and another on emissions data.

In conclusion, he outlined the elements essential to a compliance  regime: the bodies running the compliance regime should have a  clear mandate, yet be sufficiently flexible to adapt to the needs  of the new instruments and the wishes of the Parties; the  reporting system must be transparent, well defined, as detailed as  necessary and focused on specific obligations; and there must be  independent technical bodies to assist the compliance committee on  technical issues.

Natan Elkin, International Labour Organization (ILO), outlined the  compliance system and the reporting requirements established by  the Constitution of the ILO. The compliance system is comprised of  the Committee of Experts, the Conference Committee, the Committee  on Freedom of Association and the Commission of Inquiry. The  reporting system is built around two cycles: an initial cycle of  first and second reports, and a subsequent cycle of periodic  reports that are required every two years for certain priority  conventions and every five years for the others. Failure to report  is noted by the Committee of Experts in its report that is then  discussed by the Conference Committee. The Committee of Experts  presents its conclusions as observations in the case of long- standing cases of failure, as comments and surveys set out in its  report, or in direct requests that are communicated to the  concerned governments. If a country fails to conform to the  recommendations of the Governing Body or the repeated comments of  the Committee of Experts, the Conference Committee records the  government's failure to act in its report. Where more drastic  measures are called for, a resolution is adopted.

Nicholas Lockhart, World Trade Organization (WTO), distinguishing  the compliance regime of the WTO from that of multilateral  environmental agreements (MEAs), said that the WTO regime was  Party driven and did not involve the Secretariat. He introduced  the three phases and the institutional actors under the dispute  settlement regime. In the diplomatic phase, formal or informal  consultations are entered into. This is a prerequisite to formal  litigation and is used as a means of resolving the dispute or  collecting information.

The judicial phase is characterized by a compulsory procedure and  confidentiality. A panel composed of experts operates like a court  of first instance. It makes an objective assessment of the matter  and delivers a report that is automatically adopted by the dispute  settlement body. Each party can submit information at any time of  the dispute and the panel can request that information be  delivered. If this is not done, the panel may draw inferences  regarding information withheld. An appellate body provides a  'safety net' in view of the automaticity with which the panel's  report is adopted. It may uphold, modify or reverse the panel's  findings.

The final phase is implementation. The panel and/or appellate body  reports are automatically adopted by the dispute settlement body  that then makes recommendations on its basis. One of the strengths  of the dispute settlement process is its reliance on negative  consensus as a basis for decision making: unless there is  consensus against a recommendation, its content is automatic. A  dispute over implementation of the recommendations may be referred  back to the dispute panel and it can lead to trade sanctions.

Question and Answer Session: Co-Chair Espen Rønneberg questioned  if the adherence to the LRTAP common reporting format was strict  and whether, given the LRTAP system was under development, there  would be any scope for retroactive penalties. He also sought  elaboration on the issue of comparability of data and standards.  Wuester responded that adherence to the framework had been varied  and consequently was under revision. He said the format would  evolve continuously based on experience in reporting and the  comments of the Parties. On retroactive penalties, he said that he  did not have the experience to respond to this, since no case of  strict non-compliance had yet been brought before the committee.  He said, however, the focus was on non-confrontational methods and  assistance. He said work was underway on the issue of  comparability of data and technical standards, but several issues  were yet to be resolved.

Peter Sand, University of Munich, suggested that a useful contrast  could be drawn between the WTO adversarial process and the ad hoc  procedures of the ILO. One participant questioned whether the  prominent role that the Secretariats play in the non-compliance  procedure affects their neutrality. Sarma and Elkin replied in the  negative.

One participant inquired if any proposal for fixing a system of  multilateral sanctions existed under the WTO that would  effectively take into account 'level playing field' concerns of  smaller States. Lockhart responded that while no such proposal  existed, it would be useful to note that the first few cases  before the WTO dispute settlement panel were brought and won by  developing countries against the US. Another participant asked if  parties could withhold information despite their obligation to  appear before the dispute settlement panel. Lockhart replied that  the compulsory jurisdiction of the WTO existed because the members  had agreed to it. Although no legal right existed to do so, in  practice countries did withhold information. He said the panel  could draw inferences based on such behavior.

One participant asked how long the entire compliance process would  take in the case of each of the international instruments  discussed. Lockhart responded that at the WTO it could take 15  months. Sarma said the Montreal Protocol process would take less  than a year.

# COMPLIANCE SYSTEMS UNDER INTERNATIONAL TREATIES

Peter Sand, University of Munich, referred to recent efforts by  political scientists to develop a 'management' approach to treaty  compliance that seeks to address non-compliance through assistance  or capacity building.  He presented the different steps in a  compliance process. The first step would involve a reporting  system on environmental quality data, baselines and implementation  of obligations. The reports would go through a verification  process that entailed assessing quality, reviewing implementation,  monitoring compliance and establishing a fact-finding mission. He  outlined four different types of compliance institutions and  procedures: a complaint mechanism triggered by a Party or the  Secretariat; an adversarial proceeding of a judicial nature  whereby a state would initiate a dispute settlement procedure  against another state; a custodial system whereby the Secretariat  or NGOs, as opposed to Parties, have a custodial duty over treaty  compliance; and an implementation body especially created to take  over compliance issues.

On the consequences of non-compliance, he explained that these  could range from incentives such as financial or technical  assistance, to disincentives whereby the granting of an advantage  normally allowed under the treaty would be refused, and to  corrective measures.

He concluded by stressing that the retaliatory remedy of  terminating a treaty as a consequence of its breach, as in Article  26 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, made little  sense in the case of MEAs. He highlighted the special case of  international humanitarian law whose provisions can in no  circumstances be ignored. He said it was up to environmental  lawyers to develop similar rules that departed from a retaliation  approach.

### INFORMAL EXCHANGE OF VIEWS

Participants put forth a range of  views on compliance and clarified various issues during this  session. One participant commented on the reluctance to discuss  state-to-state, as opposed to multilateral, interactions in the  context of the non-compliance procedure. Sand responded that while  the issue of state-to-state interactions should be kept in mind,  the focus should be on those aspects of the non-compliance  procedure that are not state-to-state.

Another participant sought information on approaches to non- compliance at the international level that could strengthen  domestic regulations. Sand responded by giving examples, inter  alia, that the ILO had focused specifically on strengthening  national regulations on labor standards.

One participant asked what the legal consequence of merely signing  the Protocol was and whether an amendment would be required to  design a compliance system that would have binding consequences.  Sand responded that several existing provisions of the Protocol  with legal consequences could serve as a basis for a non- compliance procedure. He clarified that although a treaty would  have binding consequences only upon ratification, there was an  expectation that the signatory would not act contrary to treaty  commitments.

Another participant noted that the Montreal Protocol's indicative  list of measures that could be taken in the case of non- compliance, which included the suspension of Protocol rights and  privileges, was adopted through a MOP decision rather than through  the tedious process of an amendment. In response, Sarma said that  the indicative list was drafted under Montreal Protocol Article 8  (non-compliance procedure) that mandates Parties to draft a non- compliance procedure. Therefore the adoption of this list was  presumably legal.

The Center for International Environmental Law (CIEL) outlined  elements of its paper on compliance. On compliance information  systems, he noted that review might be more effective if review  teams can raise compliance concerns with Parties and identify  areas of non-compliance. On compliance response systems, he  stressed that compliance will be enhanced if civil society has the  right to initiate the non-compliance procedure. On the question of  determination of non-compliance, he said various features of the  WTO dispute settlement system were worth emulating. These include  the composition of the panel with independent experts rather than  government representatives, the existence of due process  provisions, and the use of negative consensus to arrive at  decisions.

## INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES RELATED TO A COMPREHENSIVE COMPLIANCE SYSTEM  UNDER THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

Facilitative and Enforcement Functions of a Compliance  System/Institutional Arrangements to Meet these Functions: In  introducing this item, Sand noted that while facilitation may only  be available to non-Annex I Parties, enforcement would address  compliance issues relating to any Annex I and non-Annex I  obligation. He suggested that participants consider whether one or  two bodies be established to exercise the facilitative and  enforcement functions. He also suggested that the relationship of  the compliance system with other institutional arrangements under  the Protocol, such as the dispute settlement mechanism, be  discussed.

Susan Biniaz (US) presented her country's proposal, as contained  in the charts in document FCCC/SB/1999/7/Add.1. The proposal is  based on several assumptions, inter alia: the design must be  specific to the Protocol; both facilitation and enforcement should  be provided for; non-compliance with Protocol Article 3  (quantified emission limitation and reduction commitments) should  lead to binding consequences known in advance; and two different  bodies should be established to deal with the two functions.

Following the presentation, one participant sought elaboration on  the distinctive nature of the facilitative and enforcement  functions in the proposal and, with other participants, questioned  the application of the latter only to developed countries. She  added that compliance with Protocol targets could also be handled  through a facilitative process, as shown by the Montreal Protocol  experience. With others, she asked whether the adoption of binding  consequences by the compliance body needed to go through the  amendment procedure as specified in Protocol Article 18 (non- compliance).

In response, Biniaz explained that while representatives of  Parties would deal with the facilitative function, independent  experts would handle enforcement issues. She added that non-Annex  I countries would not be amenable to enforcement and binding  consequences since their obligations, such as in Protocol Article  10 (continuing to advance the implementation of existing  commitments), were imprecise. On the procedure for the adoption of  binding consequences, she noted that is was not useful to let  Protocol Article 18 (non-compliance) drive the substance of the  debate.

One participant suggested that the compliance system be built  around the concept of facilitation given the real risks of  countries withdrawing from MEAs. Another participant added that  the facilitative function should also include a preventive  dimension. Another wondered whether the MCP (FCCC Article 13)  could act as the facilitative body under the Protocol. In response  another participant said that Protocol Article 16 (MCP) required  Parties to consider the application of the MCP, modified as  appropriate, to the Protocol.

The World Wildlife Fund (WWF) and CIEL presented a joint proposal  for a compliance system under the Protocol. They proposed the  creation of two bodies, a non-compliance body and a facilitative  body. The compliance process could be triggered by NGOs, the  Secretariat, Parties and through self-reporting. Cases of Annex B  Parties' non-compliance with certain select articles would go  before the screening committee that would either dismiss the case  or refer it to the non-compliance or facilitative body. In the  case of non-Annex B Parties, the case would proceed directly to  the facilitative body. Each body could refer the case to the other  if it would be more appropriately dealt with there.

One participant asked if there was a trend in international law  regarding the increasing role and significance of NGOs and  independent experts in compliance procedures. She also inquired  whether NGOs and civil society should be allowed to trigger the  process and what the composition of the compliance body should be.

Sand responded that the frequency of verification by independent  fact-finding actors had increased over the years. Regarding  composition of the compliance body, Sarma said the body could  either be of the WTO type or the MEA type. Universal participation  was critical for MEAs but not for the WTO. Given the danger of  countries abandoning MEAs, he said judgments on compliance should  ultimately be political, although aided by experts.

### Eligibility to Raise Issues:

Sand introduced this item by  stressing that the decision on who could trigger the compliance  system was a very important issue. He said it was clear that  Parties as well as the COP/MOP had this function, but that it was  more complicated when it came to the Secretariat. He added that  other potential actors, such as affected groups, could be eligible  to trigger the compliance system.

One participant stressed that this issue was linked to the nature  of the procedure. In the case of enforcement, the number of actors  entitled to trigger the process would be more limited than in a  facilitative context. With regard to Protocol Article 6.4 (joint  implementation), she said that raising an issue under Protocol  Article 8 (review of information) should not prevent a Party from  proceeding with joint implementation. On the role of the COP/MOP,  she said it should not have to approve whether an issue went  forward to facilitation or enforcement, but could have a say at  the end of the compliance procedure.

One participant cautioned that the potential triggering role of  the Secretariat should not affect its neutrality. Another  participant said that any Party was eligible to raise compliance  issues regarding Protocol Article 3 (quantified emission  limitation and reduction commitments). He added that Protocol  Article 3.2, which requires that Annex I Parties shall, by 2005,  have made demonstrable progress in achieving their commitments,  could be the basis for a facilitative compliance process in order  to help Parties 'put on track what has to be put on track.' One  participant stressed that the determination of who was eligible to  trigger a compliance regime should be decided on the basis of what  was best for the efficient functioning of the Protocol.The process  should be open and transparent. He emphasized the need to look at  processes developed under other treaties and reviewed possible  actors:*  any Party or group of Parties, generally accepted; *  the Secretariat, as shown by previous positive experiences  under the LRTAP and the Montreal Protocol; *  SBI or SBSTA or COP/MOP, which is redundant since it is covered  by a 'group of Parties;' *  expert review teams, as under Protocol Article 8 (review of  information); and *  NGOs or civil society, through a Party rather than through a  Secretariat.

Two participants suggested a possible screening of the issues that  would take the enforcement track, either by requesting the  triggering actor to bring concrete evidence of a Party's possible  non-compliance, or by providing that the enforcement track only be  taken if the expert review teams have identified a potential  problem.

### Information Gathering:

Co-Chair Dovland, introducing the topic of  information gathering, asked participants to consider the  information already available under the climate change regime  including emissions inventories of Annex I countries, national  communications, and reports of expert review teams. Sand commented  that four key questions had to be answered. They are:*  Who collects the information? *  What type of information should be gathered? *  Where should the information be gathered? *  How should the information gathering system function? On who should gather the information, he said the existing  structure had to be related to the compliance body. On the type of  information to be gathered, he said a distinction should be drawn  between environmental quality data and Parties' implementation  data. He identified sources of information as, inter alia,  governments, NGOs and industry. In the case of industry,  confidentiality concerns could be raised. On the functioning of  the information gathering system, he referred to the need for due  process.

Participants stressed the need to refer to Protocol Article 8  (review of information) in discussing the information gathering  aspect of compliance. On the link between the expert review team  reports and the compliance procedure, Co-Chair Dovland noted that  there were two options. The report could go directly to the  compliance body or it could go to the COP/MOP through the  Secretariat. In the latter case it would go to the compliance body  only if a Party complained. One participant highlighted a third  option wherein guidelines would specify the situations where the  report would go directly to the compliance body. Some favored a  role for the COP/MOP while others objected, as such a role would  politicize the compliance issue.

One participant asked what voting arrangement could be put in  place in the COP/MOP for cases of non-compliance. If it were  consensus, the party in non-compliance could vote itself out of  the compliance procedure. She also suggested that there be at  least one multilateral trigger to the compliance mechanism.

A few participants highlighted the importance of timeliness, with  one suggesting that a balance be struck between timeliness and  efficiency. One participant, stressing the facilitative function  of the compliance system and the obligations under the Protocol,  highlighted the need for Parties to have the opportunity to  respond to and correct any problems expert review teams identify.  She also stressed the necessity for a body that could provide  expert facilitative advice. A few participants underscored the  need to formalize the involvement of expertise, with one inquiring  if a permanent standing source of technical expertise existed and  if not, how the gap could be filled. Co-Chair Dovland commented  that there is an existing roster of experts, including the IPCC  roster, that could be drawn upon.

On confidentiality of information, one participant recommended  that confidentiality should not be maintained at the expense of an  effective compliance regime. Sarma, citing the Montreal Protocol  example, said that information specific to compliance could be  made public and other information could be kept confidential. One  participant recommended that the Secretariat be the appropriate  body to gather information. Another participant cautioned against  the use of information from outside bodies.

One participant highlighted the relationship between the expert  review team process and the triggering of the compliance  mechanism. He said that the expert review team's report should  contain at least the minimum information necessary to determine  non-compliance. Parties should be able to request more information  if necessary. Another participant sought clarification on what  kind of non-compliance developing countries could find themselves  in. She also asked what kind of information would be available  from developing countries, given that expert review teams did not  deal with developing countries. Co-Chair Rønneberg highlighted the  fact that there are several avenues to raise compliance questions  even within the Convention processes.

### Range of Consequences of Non-Compliance/Automatic Consequences:

Sand introduced the item by outlining the different possible  consequences in international instruments. These range from making  non-compliance publicly known, such as in human rights  conventions, to making adverse inferences on the part of the Party  that has not delivered requested information, such as the WTO  dispute settlement procedure, or to imposing sanctions. He  explained that sanctions could consist of positive measures  resulting from a facilitation process, such as access to financial  or technical assistance, or of punitive measures issued on an  enforcement basis, such as withholding funding available under the  Protocol. He added that procedural principles needed to be  developed, such as requiring proportionality between the degree of  non-compliance and the sanction imposed. He concluded by  addressing the issue of automaticity, which he understood to mean  that a determination on facts would lead to the imposition of  sanctions without requiring a decision on non-compliance. He  linked automaticity to the binding consequence of sanctions and  created a distinction between non-binding consequences, which  would be automatic and subject to an appeal process, and binding  consequences, which would not be automatic and therefore not  subject to an appeal process.

A few participants said the compliance system should, as far as  possible, only impose sanctions once facilitation had been  exhausted. One participant added that although public awareness of  non-compliance was an important consequence, it could be  insufficient in the context of technical environmental treaties.  Supported by others, he said that a list of possible consequences  should include high financial sanctions, the proceeds of which  would be used to finance greenhouse gas reduction projects in  developing countries. Other participants said they could support  neither financial nor trade sanctions.

In response to a query, Sand said that the current trend at the  global level favored trade sanctions and public exposure of non- compliance. He added that financial penalties were used in other  contexts but there was limited information on their effectiveness.  He cautioned that Parties might leave the organization upon  withdrawal of their voting rights.

Regarding the range of sanctions, several participants stressed  the need for advance notice of the options available to the  compliance body. This would help ensure legal certainty and would  act as a deterrent. One participant said the range of consequences  should be different for Annex I and non-Annex I Parties since, in  his view, facilitation would only be available to non-Annex I  Parties.

On the issue of automaticity, one participant interpreted it to  mean that a sanction could be imposed without the approval of the  non-compliant Party. Another participant said that automaticity  cannot not take into account the cause, type and degree of non- compliance. She valued a 'menu approach' whereby the Party could  choose the consequence of its non-compliance, such as borrowing  from a subsequent period or buying emission reduction units. On  specific compliance cases, one participant said that Annex I  Parties adopting mitigation measures that did not minimize adverse  effects on other Parties would risk being in non-compliance.  Another Party said that incentives should be put into place to  ensure compliance with Protocol Article 3.2 (demonstrable progress  by 2005). She added that Protocol Article 18 (non-compliance)  could not interpreted to mean that binding sanctions needed to be  adopted through an amendment.

## Other Matters

Co-Chair Rønneberg invited Sand to comment on the annex to the  note of the Co-Chairs of the joint working group on compliance  (FCCC/SB/1999/7) and asked participants to comment on next steps.  Sand said that all the elements included in the annex were useful  and needed further elaboration. On next steps, participants  expressed different views. One participant said he hoped a  compliance regime would be adopted during COP-5, another said COP- 6. Several participants said it would be helpful if the Co-Chairs  drafted elements of a compliance system for the JWG to consider at  COP-5. One participant said that such elements should provide for  a distinction between Annex I and non-Annex I Parties' compliance.  Another participant said the list of consequences should be agreed  upon before addressing other elements of the compliance system. A  third participant said the elements put forward by the Co-Chairs  should leave room for a facilitative as well as an enforcement  scenario.

## CLOSING SESSION

In conclusion, Co-Chair Rønneberg said the meeting had been  successful and that the Co-Chairs would provide an oral report of  the workshop at COP-5. He said they would also prepare a non-paper  on elements of a compliance system based on the annex to the note  of the Co-Chairs of the JWG (FCCC/SB/1999/7), Parties' submissions  (FCCC/SB/1999/7/Add.1) and discussions during the workshop. He  thanked the organizers of the workshop as well as its sponsors:  Austria, Canada, the EC, Finland, France, Germany, Japan and  Switzerland. He closed the meeting at 1:00 PM on Thursday, 7  October.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR BEFORE COP-5

### FOURTH INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS ON ENERGY, ENVIRONMENT AND  TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION

The 4th International Congress on  Energy, Environment and Technological Innovation will be held from  20-24 October 1999 in Rome, Italy. Organized by 'La Sapienza' and  'Roma Tre' Universities and the Universidad Central de Venezuela,  the Congress offers the opportunity for high-level scientific  debate and communication between participants on the problems  related to regional and urban management. For more information,  contact: EETI99, Facolta di Ingegneria, Via Eudossiana 18, 00184  Rome, Italy; fax: +39-6-4883235; Internet:  http://www.ing.ucv.ve/ceait/eeti.htm.

### INTERNATIONAL SEMINAR ON KYOTO MECHANISMS BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES

'Kyoto Mechanisms Business Opportunities: How Much is a Project  Worth? Selection, Verification and Certification of Projects,'  will be held in Basel, Switzerland, from 21-22 October 1999. For  more information contact: Wolfram Kaegi, Institute for Economy and  the Environment, University of St. Gallen, Tigerbergstrasse 2, CH- 9000 St. Gallen, Switzerland;  tel: +41-71-224-2583; fax: +41-71- 224-2722; e-mail: Wolfram.Kaegi@unisg.ch; Internet:  http://www.iwoe.unisg.ch/forschung/ji/seminar.html.

### FCCC FIFTH MEETING OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES

COP-5 will be  held from 25 October - 5 November 1999 at the Maritim Hotel in  Bonn, Germany. For more information, contact: the FCCC  Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail:  secretariat@unfccc.de; Internet: http://www.unfccc.de/.

To unsubscribe please email kcooney@iisd.org