---
title: "IPCC-24 HIGHLIGHTS"
id: enb12277e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12277e
date: 
abstract: "The twenty-fourth session of the IPCC met for a second day on  Tuesday. In the morning, delegates discussed further work on  aerosols, election procedures, and emission scenarios. In the  afternoon, delegates considered emission scenarios, outreach, and  procedures for admitting observer organizations to the IPCC. The  Financial Task Team met twice to continue discussions of the IPCC  programme and budget for 2006-08, as did a contact group on  election procedures."
---

# NATIONAL GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORIES PROGRAMME

On the proposal of the NGGIP Task Force to hold a follow-up  meeting on Emission Estimation of Aerosols Relevant to Climate  Change (IPCC-XXIV/Doc. 9), WG I Co-Chair Solomon noted concerns,  including: avoiding overlap with the work of WG I; ensuring that  the NGGIP works within its mandate and that of the IPCC; and  insufficient scientific knowledge for developing methodologies on  aerosols. NEW ZEALAND, with AUSTRIA and HUNGARY, and opposed by  the RUSSIAN FEDERATION, said the IPCC should defer consideration  of further work on aerosols until the AR4 is completed. CHINA said  aerosols should not be included in emission inventories without  better scientific knowledge. The UK, with ARGENTINA and the US,  suggested that the IPCC should 'have a story' on aerosols, even if  that story is the postponement of further work until after the AR4.

NGGIP Task Force Co-Chair Hiraishi said the NGGIP Task Force did  not intend to include aerosols in the 2006 Guidelines, or to  prepare a research programme on aerosols, rather, it wished to  consider how its expertise could assist others with research. He  noted that, given uncertainties about further work, the NGGIP Task  Force proposal could be postponed. Delegates agreed to postpone  consideration of further work until after the AR4 is completed.

# ELECTION PROCEDURES

Taking up discussions from Monday, Chair Pachauri introduced  revised draft rules of procedures for the election of the IPCC  Bureau and any Task Force Bureau, noting that the text should not  be seen 'ab initio,' bearing in mind that the language is  consistent with other IPCC documents and has gone through  extensive government scrutiny. On definitions, discussion centered  on whether Bureau members are countries or persons, with  SWITZERLAND and the RUSSIAN FEDERATION favoring reference to  countries, while HUNGARY, CANADA, BELGIUM, the NETHERLANDS and  SLOVENIA supported reference to persons. AUSTRIA and the US  suggested attending to this in the rules of procedure rather than  in the definitions.

SWITZERLAND, with HUNGARY, CANADA, NEW ZEALAND, SPAIN and KENYA,  and opposed by CHINA, stressed the need for flexibility in  organizing the IPCC Bureau and opposed reference to Annex C, which  lists the composition of the IPCC Bureau and Task Force Bureau, in  the definition of the IPCC Bureau. SWITZERLAND also opposed a  reference to Annex C in the rules for composition of the Bureaus.  The RUSSIAN FEDERATION stressed the need for members to have  government support given the intergovernmental nature of the IPCC.  The US, with HUNGARY, noted the importance of clearly defining the  functions of a nominations committee.

During contact group discussions in the afternoon and evening,  co-chaired by David Warrilow (UK) and Richard Odingo (Kenya),  delegates discussed re-election procedures and a rule on cases  where a member of the IPCC or Task Force Bureau resigns or is  unable to complete the assigned term of office. Co-Chair Warrilow  explained that the rule includes a 'security check' insofar as the  new member would have to be elected by the Panel. On terms of  appointment, FRANCE, with AUSTRIA, proposed that the IPCC Bureau  nominate a suitable replacement in cases where an IPCC member  fails to nominate a replacement candidate or is not confirmed by  the Panel. Delegates agreed to extend the time allowed for  finding a replacement from three to six months.

On nominations, most delegates supported deletion of a reference  to a candidate's nationality, agreeing that the candidate should  be regarded as a representative of the nominating country  regardless of his or her nationality.

On election procedures, many delegates supported the use of some  WMO formulations for a nominations committee to facilitate voting  procedures, and stressed the importance of Regions deciding on  their candidates. Delegates also agreed on rules about the size  and composition of the IPCC Bureau, the definition of the IPCC  Bureau, and other outstanding issues.

# IPCC PROGRAMME AND BUDGET FOR 2006-08

The Financial Task Team (FTT) met in the morning and again in the  evening after a brief update to plenary on its progress. In the  morning, the Secretariat provided information on lead author,  working group, and other meetings that were cancelled, postponed,  or held back-to-back with other meetings, and the contribution of  these meetings to the 2004-05 financial carryover. The FTT made  several adjustments to the forecast budget following requests, and  the receipt of updated information, from the TSU, the TGICA and  the NGGIP Task Force, and in light of decisions taken at IPCC-24.

In the evening FTT meeting, the Secretariat distributed a revised  IPCC Programme and Budget for 2006-08, which included the addition  of a two-year position for an information officer to assist in the  development and implementation of a communications strategy for  the AR4. Delegates approved a draft decision on the budget for  discussion in plenary on Wednesday and agreed that if additional  funding for outreach were to be included in the budget, the  request would need to come from the Panel.

# FURTHER WORK OF THE IPCC ON EMISSION SCENARIOS

Chair Pachauri introduced this issue, noting the outcomes of the  Laxemburg workshop, in particular that the IPCC should play a  facilitating and coordinating role in the development of new  emission scenarios. He introduced a proposal to establish a Task  Group (IPCC-XXIV/Doc. 11), which, with regard to new emission  scenarios, would define, inter alia: the coordination role to be  provided by the IPCC; deliverables of the emission scenarios  development process; the process and timeline for development of  new scenarios; and the organizational arrangements of the IPCC's  activities on coordinating, assessing and using scenarios. Under  the proposal, the Task Group would present its report to IPCC-25.

HUNGARY underlined the importance of emission scenarios beyond  their use by the IPCC, and stressed that the IPCC's responsibility  cannot be reduced to facilitation of the scenario development  process. The RUSSIAN FEDERATION underscored the extent to which  the IPCC's work depends upon scenarios. AUSTRIA, NEW ZEALAND and  many others highlighted the need for new emission scenarios prior  to AR5, while CHINA said new scenarios should only be considered  after the AR4 is completed. Many delegates asked for flexibility  in the composition of the Task Group proposed by Chair Pachauri.  GERMANY and others expressed a preference for the IPCC to  undertake emission scenario development, but a willingness to  compromise on the IPCC's 'coordinating and facilitating' emission  scenario development. Supported by many, the US proposed explicit  reference to the Laxemburg workshop in the Task Group mandate.  BELGIUM, GREENPEACE and others emphasized the need for coherent  assumptions and storylines, comparable scenarios, and a wide range  of scenarios including economic, demographic and other social  factors. AUSTRALIA cautioned against Task Group micromanagement by  the Plenary. The UK underscored continuity with past emission  scenarios, in order not to undermine the work upon which the AR4  is based. EGYPT and others noted the need to involve developing  countries. CHILE proposed that the IPCC develop methodology  guidelines for the development of national emission scenarios,  which would help developing countries. DENMARK stressed geo- referencing of scenarios. SPAIN emphasized the need for temporal  and spatial disaggregation of scenarios, and CHILE emphasized the  relevance of regional scenarios for decision makers. KENYA  expressed worries about the ownership of scenarios developed by  other institutions, and associated budgetary implications.  MOROCCO, noting the risk of scenario proliferation, proposed a  work group to clarify a procedure for preparing scenarios that  would serve to differentiate between IPCC and non-IPCC scenarios.  Chair Pachauri proposed to include comments from the plenary in  the IPCC-24 report. Delegates approved this Task Force proposal.

# OUTREACH

IPCC Secretary Christ presented a progress report on outreach  activities and a consultancy report entitled Framework  Communications Strategy for Release and Dissemination of the IPCC  Fourth Assessment Report. She noted the new IPCC web site could be  online before the close of IPCC-24.

Many delegates highlighted the importance of disseminating IPCC  information to the broadest possible audience. The NETHERLANDS,  with support from many others, cited the need to engage developing  countries. UGANDA and NIGERIA added that non-electronic forms of  communication should also be used when distributing documents to  many developing countries. In response to comments by SWEDEN and  FINLAND on their translation of IPCC documents into their own  languages, IPCC Secretary Christ urged countries to share such  translations with the IPCC Secretariat.

CANADA, with ARGENTINA, FRANCE and others, stressed the need for  the IPCC to use international events to disseminate information,  and for individual governments to disseminate information  nationally. The US, with SWITZERLAND and ARGENTINA, cautioned that  outreach activities must not become marketing mechanisms, as that  would extend beyond the IPCC's role. FRANCE, BELGIUM, and Chair  Pachauri spoke against the release of any products prior to IPCC  approval.

Delegates agreed that the Outreach Task Group would begin meeting  again. Chair Pachauri asked John Stone and Lucka Kajfez-Bogataj  (Slovenia) to co-chair the Task Group, and invited Austria, South  Africa, New Zealand, Bangladesh, Nigeria, Chile, Costa Rica,  Belgium, and any other interested parties to participate. The  first meeting of the Task Group is scheduled for Wednesday morning.

# PROCEDURAL MATTERS

IPCC Secretary Christ introduced a proposal for a Policy and  Process for Admitting Observer Organizations to the IPCC  (IPCC-XXIV/Doc.10). The NETHERLANDS suggested including several  additional conditions for admitting organizations. CHINA said the  policy must be consistent with the principles of the IPCC, and  proposed establishing a work group on the issue. HUNGARY, the US,  AUSTRIA and SWITZERLAND emphasized the role of observer  organizations in facilitating transparency and confidence in  organizations. Deliberations will continue in plenary on  Wednesday.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

Several delegates noted that disagreements regarding election  procedures seemed to reflect diverging views of the IPCC's dual  roles as a scientific and an intergovernmental body. One observer,  noting the polarized positions on election procedures, expressed  pessimism about whether the issue would be resolved at IPCC-24.  From the reported success of an evening contact group on the  issue, he could prove to be wrong.