---
title: "SUMMARY OF THE ELEVENTH SESSION OF THE INC FOR A FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE:: 6-17 FEBRUARY 1995"
id: 1211000e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/1211000e
date: 1995-02-17
abstract: "The eleventh session of the Intergovernmental Negotiating  Committee for a Framework Convention on Climate Change  (INC/FCCC) met from 6-17 February 1995 at UN Headquarters in  New York. This final meeting of the INC was supposed to  complete the preparations for the first Conference of the  Parties in Berlin from 28 March - 7 April 1995."
---

During the two-week session, delegates addressed a wide  range of issues including arrangements for the first session  of the Conference of Parties (COP), location of the  Permanent Secretariat, Rules of Procedure for the COP,  matters relating to commitments, matters relating to  arrangements for the financial mechanism, and provision of  technical and financial support to developing country  Parties. While delegates did agree to maintain the Global  Environment Facility (GEF) as the interim entity operating  the financial mechanism and to finance mitigation  activities, little concrete progress was made on other  important issues before the Committee. Delegates were unable  to take action on the adequacy of commitments or to begin  negotiations on a draft protocol submitted by the Alliance  of Small Island States (AOSIS). There was no progress on  joint implementation (JI). Delegates had little time to  address technical and financial support to developing  countries. The location of the Permanent Secretariat remains  pending, although the four countries offering to host the  Secretariat (Canada, Germany, Switzerland and Uruguay) have  been asked to negotiate among themselves so that a single  nomination is presented to the COP in Berlin. Finally,  delegates were unable to reach agreement on the Rules of  Procedure, a problem that will  haunt the Parties at COP-1,  who may find their substantive work hampered by the lack of  agreement on voting procedures and the allocation of seats  on the COP Bureau.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE  CHANGE

Increasing scientific evidence about the possibility of  global climate change in the 1980s led to a growing  awareness that human activities have been contributing to  substantial increases in the atmospheric concentrations of  greenhouse gases. Concerned that anthropogenic increases of  emissions enhance the natural greenhouse effect and would  result on average in an additional warming of the Earth's  surface, the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the  United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) responded by  establishing the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  (IPCC) in 1988. The Panel focused on: assessing scientific  information related to the various aspects of climate  change; evaluating the environmental and socioeconomic  impacts of climate change; and formulating response  strategies for the management of climate change. In 1990,  the Second World Climate Conference and the adoption of the  first IPCC assessment focused further attention on climate   change.

## ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INC/FCCC

On 11 December 1990, the UN General Assembly adopted  resolution 45/212 establishing the Intergovernmental  Negotiating Committee for a Framework Convention on Climate  Change (INC/FCCC). Supported by UNEP and WMO, the mandate of  the INC/FCCC was to prepare an effective framework  convention on climate change. The INC held five sessions,  between February 1991 and May 1992. Participants from over  150 states met to discuss the difficult and contentious  issues: binding commitments; targets and timetables for the  reduction of carbon dioxide emissions; financial mechanisms;  technology transfer; and 'common but differentiated'  responsibilities of developed and developing countries. The  INC sought to achieve a consensus that could be supported by  a broad majority, rather than drafting a treaty that dealt  with specific policies that might limit participation.

## ADOPTION AND ENTRY INTO FORCE

The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  was adopted on 9 May 1992, in New York, and opened for  signature at the UN Conference on Environment and  Development in June 1992 at Rio, where it received 155  signatures. The Convention entered into force on 21 March  1994 (90 days after the 50th ratification).

Since the adoption of the Convention, the INC has met six  times. The sixth session of the INC (INC-6) identified those  tasks specified in the Convention to be carried out by the  COP at its first session (COP-1) and decided that these  tasks would form a large part of INC work in preparing for  COP-1. During these INC sessions, scientific work was done  on improving the methodologies for measuring emissions from  various sources, but the larger scientific problem of  choosing the best methodology to measure the removal of  carbon dioxide by 'sinks' remains. The other major task  before negotiators was to work on the difficult issue of  financial support for implementation, particularly for  developing country Parties who will require new and  additional resources to obtain data and implement necessary  measures.

## INC-7

INC-7 was held in New York from 15-20 March 1993. Delegates  began to discuss matters relating to the implementation of  Article 11 (Financial mechanism), as well as the interim  arrangements provided under Article 21.3. The INC decided to  focus on matters related to the functional linkages between  the COP and the operating entity or entities of the  financial mechanism and considered the provision of guidance  to the financial mechanism on policies, programme priorities  and eligibility criteria. Working Group II members were  requested to submit proposals on these subjects at INC-8.  The INC also considered it important that the ongoing  replenishment of the GEF for the period 1994-1996 take full  account of the Convention's needs. The Executive Secretary  proposed a joint project with UNEP to establish an  information exchange system that would be a first step in   support of Article 12.7 (provision of technical and  financial support to developing country Parties in compiling  and communicating information). INC-7 decided that Working  Group I should start consideration of matters relating to  methodologies for calculations/inventories of emissions and  removals of greenhouse gases; criteria for joint  implementation; and first review of information communicated  by Annex I Parties at INC-8.

## INC-8

The eighth session of the INC was held in Geneva from 16-27  August 1993. Working Group I held a preliminary discussion  on methodologies for calculations/inventories of emissions  and removals of greenhouse gases. The INC recognized 1990 as  the appropriate base year for inventories, taking into  account the situation of countries with economies in  transition. Working Group I also held preliminary  discussions on criteria for joint implementation of  commitments by Annex I Parties. Given the limited amount of  time before the first review of information by Annex I  Parties, INC-8 concluded that the Interim Secretariat  provide draft guidelines ensuring transparency, consistency  and flexibility. Working Group II focused on matters  relating to the implementation of Article 11 (financial  mechanism). There was general agreement that the financial  mechanism shall function under the guidance and be  accountable to the COP, and only Parties to the Convention  would be eligible to receive funding upon the Convention's  entry into force. Some of the preliminary conclusions  reached by INC-8 on the 'modalities for the functioning of  operational linkages between the COP and the operating  entity of the financial mechanism,' included: the COP will  communicate to the governing body of the operating entity  relevant policy guidance on issues relating to policies,  programme priorities and eligibility criteria; the governing  body of the operating entity has the responsibility of  ensuring that funded projects conform with the policies,  programme priorities and eligibility criteria established by  the COP; and the COP should receive and review reports from  the operating entity or entities.

## INC-9

INC-9 was held in Geneva from 7-18 February 1994. INC-9  continued its examination of matters relating to  commitments, including the adequacy of commitments. The need  for broader action beyond the year 2000 on commitments in  Article 4.2(a) and (b) was considered based on the  understanding that the provisions of Article 4.2(a) and (b)  refer to the present decade.

In its discussions on matters relating to the financial  mechanism and for technical and financial support to  developing country Parties, the Committee continued to focus  on the implementation of Article 11, approaches to determine  full incremental costs, and institutional matters. With  regard to procedural matters, INC-9 recommended that INC-10  deal with the Rules of Procedure of the COP and its  subsidiary bodies. There was general support for a  cost- effective arrangement for the Permanent Secretariat that  would encourage collaboration with other secretariats. It  was agreed that the Permanent Secretariat would start  operating on 1 January 1996 and, in the interest of  continuity, be built along the lines of the Interim  Secretariat.

## INC-10

INC-10 was held in Geneva from 22 August-2 September 1994.  Delegates adopted the guidelines on the first review of  information communication by Annex I Parties. Some countries  expressed the need for a cautious approach to the review of  the adequacy of commitments because the scientific and  technical information  underlying existing commitments was  basically unchanged. Some countries also said that COP 1  would be an opportunity to make progress on the elaboration  of additional commitments. On the issue of joint  implementation, comments were invited on: objectives,  criteria and operational guidelines, institutional  arrangements, communication and review and early  experiences.

On matters related to the financial mechanism, countries  agreed to stage-by-stage funding modality for adaptation  measures. An agreement on the temporary arrangements between  the Committee and the GEF was adopted. The Committee  concluded that the issue of 'incremental costs' was complex  and that further discussion was needed. It was also  concluded that the concept should be flexible and applied on  a case-by-case basis. The Interim Secretariat was requested  to prepare a paper on the transfer of technology. On the  subject of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and  Technological Advice (SBSTA) and the Subsidiary Body for  Implementation (SBI), the provisional recommendation to the  COP is that the SBSTA will be the link between the  scientific and technical assessments provided by  international bodies and the policy-oriented needs of the  COP. The SBI will develop recommendations to assist the COP  in its assessment and review of the implementation of the  Convention. With regard to procedural and legal matters, the  Committee decided to continue its consideration of the draft  Rules of Procedure at INC-11. On institutional matters, a  Contact Group composed of five members of the Bureau, one  from each of the five regional groups, was established to  consider the various offers to host the Permanent  Secretariat and make recommendations for consideration at  INC-11.

Subsequent to INC-10, the Alliance of Small Island States  submitted a draft protocol to the Interim Secretariat, which  was subsequently distributed to other Parties. The protocol  calls for a reduction of emissions of GHGs by Annex I  Parties by 'at least 20%  by the year 2005.'

# INC-11 REPORT

INC Chair Raul Estrada-Oyuela opened INC-11 by noting a  sense of satisfaction that 118 States and the EEC had  ratified the Convention. He said that one of the most  important tasks of this session is the review of the first   15 national reports submitted by Annex I developed  countries. With regard to commitments, he stated that while  some believe that after the year 2000 countries can increase  their C02 emissions, this is not the case. Annex I countries  are legally bound to reduce their emissions to 1990 levels  by the year 2000. If this is not enough to stabilize  greenhouse gas concentrations, new commitments will be  necessary. Agreement on these new commitments will not be  easy and may require greater involvement of large developing  countries.

INC Executive-Secretary Michael Zammit Cutajar then  introduced the provisional agenda (A/AC.23/77), which  delegates adopted. The Committee then adopted the schedule  of work (A/AC.237/77, Annex II), as amended orally.

In his opening statement, Bert Bolin, Chair of the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), raised  three issues: recent findings regarding radiative forcing of  the atmosphere and the interpretation of the emission  scenarios in the IPCC 1994 Special Report; the intensified  general debate concerning knowledge about climate change;  and the role of the IPCC in the future work of the  Convention. With regard to the latter, he said that it is  most important that the future status of the IPCC relative  to the COP be clarified so that countries can decide on ways  and means to support the IPCC financially.

Mohamed El-Ashry, CEO and Chair of the Global Environment  Facility (GEF), noted that the Interim Secretariat of the  Convention and the GEF have reached agreement on GEF  arrangements to fund enabling activities and preparations  for national communications. At its first meeting in July,  the GEF Council approved a two-track programme of work. The  first track will produce an overarching operational  strategy, as well as specific strategies for the focal  areas. The second will allocate limited resources to a  relatively small number of activities on which guidance is  fairly clear. He added that the GEF, in its replenished and  restructured form, responds to the requirements of Articles  21(3) and 11 of the Convention, and is ready to serve as the  permanent financial mechanism for the Convention.

## PLENARY

The Plenary was responsible for discussing arrangements for  COP-1, status of ratification of the Convention, review of  annexes to the Convention, designation of a Permanent  Secretariat and the Rules of Procedure.

### AGENDA ITEM 2 - ARRANGEMENTS FOR COP-1

On Friday, 10  February 1995, the Interim Secretariat introduced document  A/AC.237/78, on arrangements for the COP-1 and invited  delegates to comment on the establishment of a sessional  Committee of the Whole, participation in the debate during  the ministerial segment and duration of statements. The  Chair reported on preliminary consultations concerning the  election of officers for COP-1 and the subsidiary  bodies. The head of the German delegation will serve as  President. Pending the outcome of negotiations on Rule 22 of  the Rules of Procedure (Officers), there will be seven   Vice-Presidents, a Rapporteur and the Chairs of the two  subsidiary bodies. Later in the week, it was announced that  the regional groups had nominated their candidates for the  Bureau, including: India, Japan, Mauritania, Zimbabwe, the  Russian Federation, Hungary, Argentina and Antigua and  Barbuda, Germany, Australia and Samoa.

On Wednesday, 15 February 1995, delegates adopted draft  decision A/AC.237/L.25, which notes the allocation of tasks,  statements and admission of organizations as observers to  the COP. The Committee's report will also reflect the  following: the Committee noted the agreement between the  Interim Secretariat and Germany for the COP; heads of  organizations have been invited to speak; and the Committee  has requested the Secretariat to draft the provisional  agenda for COP-1.

### AGENDA ITEM 3 - STATUS OF RATIFICATION OF THE CONVENTION

The Committee addressed the status of ratification of the  Convention (A/AC.237/INF.15/Rev.2) on Monday, 6 February  1995. The Secretariat noted that 118 States and the EEC had  deposited their instruments of ratification in time to  participate in COP-1. Thailand, Kuwait, the Russian  Federation, the Solomon Islands, Saudi Arabia and Mali  announced that they had recently ratified the Convention.  Tanzania expects to ratify the Convention before the first  COP. Turkey has not signed the Convention because it is  considered an Annex I country. Colombia expects to ratify  the Convention soon. It was later announced that the  instruments of ratification had been received from Kiribati  and Lesotho (7 February 1995) and Oman (8 February 1995),  bringing the total to 121 States and the EEC.

### AGENDA ITEM 4 - REVIEW OF ANNEXES TO THE CONVENTION

On  Wednesday, 8 February 1995, the Czech Republic announced  that his Government should be prepared to amend Annex I at  COP-2. In response to a question from Japan, the Chair said  Czechoslovakia was an Annex I country and since it has been  succeeded by two countries, the annex has to be amended  accordingly.

### AGENDA ITEM 5 - DESIGNATION OF A PERMANENT SECRETARIAT

This  agenda item consisted of three sub-items that were discussed  separately. A Contact Group was established at INC-10 to  consider this item and its conclusions were circulated in  document A/AC.237/79/Add.5.

(a) Institutional Linkages: At INC-10, the Chair was  requested to invite the UN Secretary-General to advise INC- 11 on an institutional arrangement for the Permanent  Secretariat. The advice from the Secretary-General is  annexed to document A/AC.237/79/Add.1. Additional documents  to facilitate consideration of this matter included the  conclusions of the Contact Group (A/AC.237/79/Add.5) and a  note by the Executive Secretary on support for the  Convention (A/AC.237/79/Add.6).

In the brief discussion on this matter, the EU supported the  recommendation that the Secretariat should be attached to  the UN without being incorporated into any department or  programme. Australia supported a partnership between UNEP,   UNDP and the DPCSD, but asked for assurance of Secretariat  autonomy. The Chair suggested recommending that the COP  request the Secretary-General to propose a concrete  arrangement for the administrative management of the  Secretariat.

(b) Financial Rules: Documentation for this item included  A/AC.237/79/Add.2 and corrigenda 1 and 2, on the draft  financial procedures. The Interim Secretariat introduced  Annex 1 to A/AC.237/79/Add.2 and commented that the  Committee must reach agreement on the deadline for drawing  up the administrative budget and the review of the budget -  the COP could establish a Financial Committee or avail  itself of the UN Advisory Committee on Administrative and  Budgetary Questions (ACABQ). He noted the Contact Group  preferred the first alternative, with advice from the ACABQ.

The Chair reported that in A/AC.237/79/Add.5, the Contact  Group on the Permanent Secretariat analyzed both the  financial procedures and the budget outline for 1996/97. The  Contact Group supported the establishment of a Finance  Committee, consisting of 10-15 Parties, which could meet  during sessions of the COP or the subsidiary bodies. The  Contact Group also proposed establishing a small group at  this session to study the 1996/97 budget outline. This Group  met during INC-11.

The EU and the US suggested that the scale of contributions  to the budget be more explicit. Benin recommended  establishing a floor as well as a ceiling for contributions  from the Parties. Developing countries noted that two  considerations must be taken into account: the determination  of developing country contributions on the ability to pay;  and the principle that no developing country must pay more  than any developed country.

With regard to reviewing the budget, the EU noted that the  composition of the ACABQ did not coincide with the Parties  to the Convention. The Interim Secretariat replied that the  ACABQ, a standing body, was only included to alleviate  concerns about the new Secretariat and that more guidance  was needed from the Parties before they could develop a  detailed budget. The Russian Federation thought  consultations with the ACABQ would be useful. The EU, Japan  and Australia expressed doubts about bringing this matter  before the ACABQ.

With regard to funding for the IPCC, the Executive Secretary  said that consultations are underway on the type of services  the IPCC is expected to deliver and that the Secretariat  would possibly contribute 10-15% of the IPCC budget.  Australia and New Zealand supported setting aside  Secretariat funds for the IPCC.

On Wednesday, 16 February 1995, the Chair introduced  document A/AC.237/L.26 on financial rules. The G-77 and  China agreed with the draft decision, but reserved the right  to revisit the paragraphs on contributions and funds. Japan  and the US asked questions about the voluntary nature of  contributions. The Plenary will recommend the financial   rules to the COP and all comments will be recorded in the  report.

(c) Physical Location: During the initial discussion on this  matter on Wednesday, 8 February 1995, the Chair gave the  floor to the representatives of the countries offering to  host the Secretariat. The information about each offer is  contained in A/AC.237/79/Add.4. Canada explained that  Toronto is a leader in environmental protection and a  multicultural city well suited to host the Secretariat.  Germany outlined its proposal to host the Secretariat in  Bonn, which has excellent communications and transportation  facilities and is a major academic, scientific and cultural  center. Switzerland said that the choice for the  Secretariat's location should be based on effectiveness, not  finance or prestige, and that Geneva, as a UN center, would  be the most effective. While Uruguay could not offer  monetary subsidies or financial assistance to developing  countries, the low cost of living and services in Montevideo  would amply offset the absence of generous subsidies. Kenya  announced that it has withdrawn its offer to host the  Secretariat.

The Contact Group recommended that the Committee take three  criteria into account in assessing the offers to host the  Permanent Secretariat: convenience of access by delegations  to the Permanent Secretariat and meetings; possible  budgetary savings by locating the Secretariat near other UN  offices or secretariats; and the contribution offered by the  potential host government in cash and/or in kind.

Italy and Poland supported Bonn. Mexico supported Toronto.  Australia supported Geneva, because co-location of  secretariats allows cross-fertilization among secretariat  personnel and saves costs. It also saves costs for  governments that would be able to maintain fewer diplomatic  missions. For similar reasons, the US, New Zealand and  Norway also prefer Geneva. Nigeria said that economics and  co-location are logical considerations, but hoped that this  would not  prevent developing countries from hosting other  UN secretariats. Canada added that the logic of the Contact  Group's report is that if a city is not a UN center, it  should not apply.

By the conclusion of the session, the Contact Group was  unable to make a recommendation and asked Canada, Germany,  Switzerland and Uruguay to hold consultations among  themselves before COP-1 to facilitate a decision on the  issue.

### AGENDA ITEM 6 - RULES OF PROCEDURE

On Friday, 10 February  1995, the Chair of the informal consultations on the Rules  of Procedure, Amb. T.P. Sreenivasan, proposed that delegates  exchange views on the outstanding issues in  A/AC.237/L.22/Rev.1 and then establish a drafting group to  work out the details. The drafting group met on Monday, 13  February 1995, and was able to reach agreement on some of  the rules. Consensus remained elusive on Rule 42 (Voting).  One delegation put forward new amendments to Rule 22  (Officers) and Rule 27 (Subsidiary Bodies), which were not   discussed until Tuesday, 14 February 1995. In addition,  Japan raised concern once again with Rule 54 (Languages). At  the closing Plenary, the Chair announced that there was  still no agreement on Rules 22, 42 and 54 and that he would  have to submit the Rules, brackets and all, as contained in  A/AC.237/L.22/Rev.2, to the COP. The following is the  current status of the Rules of Procedure.

Rule 4 (Dates of Sessions): At the start of the session,  there was a bracketed sentence prohibiting COP sessions  during religious holidays of a significant number of  delegates. Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Sudan called for its  retention. The EU, Fiji, Australia, Kenya, Benin and the UK,  while sympathetic, worried about setting a precedent. The  final compromise reached by the drafting group is 'The  Conference of the Parties should endeavor not to hold such a  session at a time which would make the attendance of a  significant number of delegations difficult.' Rule 6 (Observers): Delegates agreed to remove the brackets  so that 'any international entity or entities entrusted by  the COP pursuant to Article 11 of the Convention with the  operation of the financial mechanism' can be represented at  the COP as observers.

Rule 12 (Agenda): Two issues remained at the start of the  session: should the Secretariat consult with the President  or the Bureau when submitting additional items for the  agenda, and should there be a time limit. The agreed  language reads as follows: 'The secretariat shall, in  agreement with the President, include any item which is  proposed by a Party and has been received by the secretariat  after the provisional agenda has been produced, but before  the opening of the session, in a supplementary provisional  agenda.' Rule 22 (Officers): The last-minute amendment proposed to  this rule would add a representative from the oil exporting  countries to the Bureau. The US, the EU, Australia, Canada  and New Zealand objected to this proposal because there are  many categories of special needs countries, besides AOSIS  (which has had a seat on the INC Bureau), and opening the  Bureau to one will require opening it to the others. The EU  added that the small island States face a physical threat,  whereas the OPEC countries face only economic adjustments  like every other Party. There was no agreement.

Rule 42 (Voting): The major issues to be resolved include  the general rule on matters of procedure, deviations from  that rule, the general rule on matters of substance, the  rule on the adoption of protocol, and the rule on financial  matters. There was disagreement on whether matters of  substance and/or protocols should be decided by consensus  or, if that fails, by a 2/3 or a 3/4 majority.

Venezuela, Kuwait, Colombia, Saudi Arabia, Nigeria, Iran,  China and Zaire preferred Alternative B in  A/AC.237/L.22/Rev.2, which ensures that substantive  decisions, including the adoption of protocols, are taken by  consensus. The EU, Australia, Japan, Canada, Czech Republic,  Brazil, Switzerland, South Africa and Slovakia expressed   favor for Alternative A, provided that a decision to adopt a  protocol would be taken by a 3/4 majority. New Zealand and  the US preferred Alternative A but were flexible on either a  2/3 or 3/4 majority. Trinidad and Tobago (on behalf of  AOSIS) the Marshall Islands, Samoa, Micronesia, Norway,  Mauritius, Solomon Islands and Cuba preferred Alternative A,  provided that protocols are adopted by consensus or, as a  last resort, a 2/3 majority vote. Both options remain  bracketed.

Rule 54 - Languages: Japan proposed that the official  languages of the COP should be English, French and Spanish.  The Russian Federation and China objected and threatened to  bracket the entire document unless all six UN languages are  listed. During the final Plenary discussion on this matter,  Japan proposed instead that Rule 54 remain unaltered, but  that a second paragraph or a footnote should be included  stating, 'The lack of documentation or interpretation in any  these languages due to budgetary constraints shall not  interrupt the smooth proceeding of COP and its subsidiary  bodies.' The Russian Federation, supported by the EU, China  and Kuwait, said this proposal was unacceptable.

### AGENDA ITEM 10 - REVIEW OF ACTIVITIES OF THE INTERIM  SECRETARIAT

The Interim Secretariat introduced document  A/AC.237/80, a review of Secretariat activities and  extrabudgetary funds. He explained the geographic diversity  of the staff, estimates for funding needs and contributions  to the Special Voluntary Fund. The EU, supported by Germany,  Switzerland and Canada, proposed a working group to address  budgetary matters and asked that it review both the 1995 and  1996/97 budgets.

## WORKING GROUP I

Working Group I dealt with matters relating to commitments,  including first review of national communications, adequacy  of commitments, joint implementation, methodological issues,  and the roles of the subsidiary bodies established by the  Convention.

AGENDA ITEM 7(a) - FIRST REVIEW OF NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS:  This item was divided into two sub-items: a review of the  compilation and synthesis of national reports and the  process for the ongoing review of communications from Annex  I Parties.

(i) Review of a compilation and synthesis, including the  overall effects of policies and measures: The Secretariat  presented A/AC.237/82, the compilation and synthesis of the  first national communications from Annex I Parties. The  report reviewed 15 national communications from countries  representing 41% of global greenhouse gas emissions. The  report showed that C02 accounts for 75% of reported  emissions. Parties reported approximately 700 policies and  measures. Compared to 1990 levels, nine Parties projected  increased C02 emissions in 2000 without additional measures,  five projected stabilization or a decrease and one projected  a decrease by 2005. For CH4, all but two Parties projected a  decrease.

(ii) Process for the ongoing review of first communications   from Annex I Parties: Delegates debated whether the proposed  biannual national communications and annual reports were too  frequent or would be too expensive to complete. Poland,  Switzerland, Hungary and the Czech Republic recommended a  longer period between reports. The US, Norway, Japan, New  Zealand, Australia and Argentina supported the Secretariat's  recommendation. Another issue was whether to name Parties in  the synthesis reports, or leave references anonymous to  preserve a non-confrontational approach. The US opposed  naming Parties. Switzerland, Norway and Argentina said  naming Parties would be acceptable, and the EU recommended  flexibility in naming Parties. The US and EU also urged that  national communications cover all gases, not just C02.

The Working Group adopted document A/AC.237/WG.1/L.27 along  with a second document on reporting guidelines for  developing countries. The decision urges Annex I Parties  that have not submitted national communications to do so. It  requests a second communication from Annex I Parties by 15  April 1997, and sets an annual requirement for emissions  inventories. The Secretariat will produce a second synthesis  report in 'non-confrontational' language and name Parties  'as appropriate.' The document on developing countries' reporting takes note  of the G-77 and China's document A/AC.237/Misc.40, and  directs subsidiary bodies to develop a set of reporting  guidelines for non-Annex I communications. The guidelines  are to be prepared by COP-2.

AGENDA ITEM 7(b) - REVIEW OF THE ADEQUACY OF COMMITMENTS:In Plenary on Wednesday, 8 February 1995, Amb. Annette des  Iles (Trinidad and Tobago) introduced A/AC.237/L.23, the  draft protocol submitted on behalf of AOSIS in September  1994, in accordance with Article 17 of the Convention. She  noted that the protocol does not impose any additional  obligations on developing country Parties. Its specific  provisions include the following: The Preamble emphasizes  that the burden of achieving the Convention's objectives  rests with the developed States. In Article 1 (Definitions)  Sections (1), (7) and (8) differentiate between 'Parties' to  the Protocol and 'Parties to the Convention.' Article 2  (Basic Commitment) restates the core of the commitment  contained in Article 4(1)(b) of the Convention. Article 3  (Targets for greenhouse gas reductions)is based on the  'Toronto target.' It requires developed country Parties to  the Protocol who are included in Annex I to reduce their C02  emissions by 2005 to a level at least 20% below that of 1990  and to establish timetables for controlling emissions of  other greenhouse gases. Article 3(1)(b) requires that Annex  I Parties adopt specific targets on other greenhouse gases.  Article 3(2) (Review and revision of targets) authorizes the  Meeting of the Parties to 'review and revise' both the C02  targets and timetable and the controls for other greenhouse  gases. Article 3(3) (Accession of non-Annex I Parties to the  specific commitments) says the commitments are binding only  on the Annex I Parties. Article 4 (Coordination Mechanism)  creates a subsidiary body to  provide advice to the Meeting  of the Parties. Article 5 (Reporting Requirements) includes  a new reporting requirement in Article 5(2) that Annex I  Parties provide a cost/benefit analysis of measures  undertaken. Article 6 (Institutional Arrangements) uses  institutions established under the Convention. Article 7  (Technology transfer) requires that the 'best available  technologies...are expeditiously transferred to developing  countries' under 'fair and most favourable conditions.'  Article 8 establishes a Meeting of the Parties with powers  to review the Protocol's implementation. Article 9 (Dispute  settlement) states that disputes are to be settled in  accordance with the Convention. Article 10 establishes the  same procedure for amendments to the Protocol as amendments  to the Convention.

Dr. Michael von Websky (Germany) introduced  A/AC.237/L.23/Add.1 and noted that the proposal addresses   targets and timetables, as well as policies and measures.  He said ambitious reduction targets for C02 and other  greenhouse gases, such as methane and N2O, would make it  possible to formulate clear political objectives. He  suggested the broader application of economic instruments,  increasing energy efficiency, increased use of renewable  energy sources, the preservation, sustainable management and  improvement of existing forests, and afforestation. He said  a consensus was required at the COP on a commitment by Annex  I Parties to stabilize their C02 emissions, individually or  jointly, at 1990 levels by 2000.

Following the introduction of the AOSIS protocol and the  German elements paper in the Plenary, Working Group I  discussed the adequacy of commitments. The Secretariat  invited comments on A/AC.237/Misc.43, a compilation of  scientific studies, and A/AC.237/L.23 and A/AC.237/L.23/Add.  1, the AOSIS protocol and the German proposals. Developing  countries said that current commitments were inadequate but  opposed new commitments. OECD countries also termed current  commitments inadequate and recommended negotiating a  protocol or other future commitments. The G-77 and China  warned against shifting responsibilities from Annex I  Parties to developing countries through new commitments.  Saudi Arabia and Kuwait urged caution in accepting new  commitments. China said protocol negotiations were premature  and said Annex I Parties should meet existing commitments  before considering new ones. Japan said protocol  negotiations should be completed by COP-3. Switzerland and  Australia called for completion of negotiations by 1998.

The Co-Chairs' draft decision included a recommendation that  the COP establish a follow-up process. Trinidad and Tobago,  on behalf of AOSIS, said the recommendations to COP-1 should  include initiating negotiations on a protocol. Argentina,  Fiji, Colombia, Mauritius, Chile, Malaysia and Bolivia  supported the AOSIS protocol. Germany emphasized the need  for a protocol on greenhouse gas reduction in all countries.  The US highlighted the need for 'new aims' and strengthening  the process of negotiations through the SBI in the post-2000   era.

Working Group I and the Plenary adopted A/AC.237/WG.I/ L.28,  a review of the adequacy of commitments in Article 4.2(a)  and (b). After intense negotiations, delegates agreed that  the decision would describe Article 4.2(a) and (b) as 'only  a first step in meeting the ultimate objective of the  Convention' and 'subject to review at the first session of  the Conference of the Parties.' The decision transmits the  AOSIS and German proposals and recommends that the COP 'take  appropriate action' based on the report of INC-11.

AGENDA ITEM 7(c)- CRITERIA FOR JOINT IMPLEMENTATION:  Delegates discussed A/AC.237/Misc.44 and  A/AC.237/Misc.44/Add.1 on Criteria for Joint Implementation  (JI). Three different draft decisions were proposed on JI.  The US, supported by Japan, Australia and Canada, introduced  both draft language for a decision on JI and an appendix on  criteria (A/AC.237/WG.I/L.32). The US draft establishes a  pilot phase for JI beginning immediately after COP-1 and  open to all Parties. The SBSTA would develop monitoring and  evaluation modalities and report to the SBI and the COP. The  criteria include that JI is voluntary, does not modify  commitments, is financed outside existing ODA or Annex II  GEF contributions, addresses any gases, sources or sinks,  and includes data and methodological information to compare  emissions with and without the JI measure. The US tied  negotiations on JI to the negotiation of 'new aims' on  strengthening of the Convention.

The EU draft (A/AC.237/WG.I/L.31) initiates a JI pilot phase  immediately after COP-1 open to Annex I Parties and others  that volunteer to participate. The EU's criteria include  that JI 'in no way modifies the commitments' of  participating Parties, shall be financed independently of  Convention obligations, can deal with any gases, sources or  sinks, excludes crediting during the pilot phase, and shall  bring about measurable benefits assessed by environmental,  economic and social effects. An annex to the EU proposal  establishes guidelines for reporting on JI activities.

The G-77 and China proposal (A/AC.237/WG.I/L.30) emphasizes  that only Annex I Parties are obligated to limit GHG  emissions, and that developing country Parties have no such  obligations. It separates JI activities undertaken between  Annex I and developing country Parties, placing those under  Article 4.5, and links JI to national activities in capacity  building and technology transfer. It recommends that: JI is  applicable only to Annex I Parties; crediting to Annex I  Parties is prohibited in the pilot phase; and COP-1 should  develop criteria for JI implementation.

The Philippines, on behalf of the G-77 and China, noted that  JI should not allow for the shifting of specific commitments  of Annex I Parties to developing countries. Saudi Arabia,  supported by Kuwait, Iran and Nigeria, said that the pilot  phase of JI should be limited to Annex I Parties. Chile  accepted the idea of a pilot phase with a certain percentage  of credits for developed and developing countries. Despite a  contact group and informal consultations that lasted past   midnight, delegates were unable to resolve differences  between the various proposals. Document A/AC.237/WG.I/L.29,  which recommends that COP-1 consider all three draft texts,  was finally adopted.

AGENDA ITEM 7(d) - METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES: Discussion began  with document A/AC/237/84. The EU suggested continued use of  draft IPCC guidelines for national communication and  collaboration between subsidiary bodies. The EU, Japan,  Australia and the US supported use of global warming  potentials (GWPs). Australia said countries should have  flexibility in applying their own guidelines if they were  comparable to those of the IPCC. Japan said non-Annex I  Parties could apply the IPCC guidelines. China said the IPCC  guidelines were too complicated for developing countries,  who should develop their own simplified guidelines.  Developed countries expressed concern over what  simplification would mean and how it would effect  comparability and transparency of national communications.

The draft decision on this item, A/AC.237/WG.I/L.25, states  that the IPCC guidelines or simplified default methodologies  'should be used by non-Annex I Parties, as appropriate and  to the extent possible.' It also states that Parties may use  GWPs to express their inventories and projections in C02  equivalents, using the IPCC 1994 Special Report's 100-year  time horizon.

AGENDA ITEM 7(e) - THE ROLES OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES  ESTABLISHED BY THE CONVENTION: The Secretariat presented  document A/AC.237/85 on the roles of the subsidiary bodies.  The EU said adequacy of commitments should be the  responsibility of an ad hoc committee under the SBI. The US  said adequacy and review of national communications were the  responsibility of the SBI, and that the SBSTA should develop  guidelines for national communications. The G-77 and China  said that the SBSTA should work out guidelines for the IPCC  report and that the SBSTA should not be subordinated to the  SBI. Kuwait and Saudi Arabia suggested adding socioeconomic  reviews to scientific and technical considerations by SBSTA.  The G-77 and China said the number of meetings of the  subsidiary bodies should be limited to save money and permit  participation of developing countries.

The draft decision adopted on subsidiary bodies,  A/AC.237/WG.I/L.26, directs the SBSTA to: summarize  scientific, technical, socioeconomic and other information  provided by competent bodies, including the IPCC; consider  scientific, technical and socioeconomic aspects of the in- depth reviews; and carry out various tasks related to  technology transfer. SBSTA will also deal with methodologies  for inventories, projections, effects of measures,  impact/sensitivity analyses and adaptation. The SBI will  consider policy aspects of in-depth reviews, effects on  emissions trends of steps taken by Parties and any further  commitments, and advise the COP on the financial mechanism,  technology transfer, and adequacy of commitments including  conducting negotiations on resolutions, amendments and   protocols.

## WORKING GROUP II

Working Group II considered matters relating to arrangements  for the financial mechanism, including implementation of  Article 11 and maintenance of interim arrangements for the  mechanism, and reviewed programmes providing technical and  financial support to developing country Parties. The Group  also considered issues of technology transfer and the format  for communication of information by non-Annex I Parties.

### AGENDA ITEM 8 - MATTERS RELATING TO ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE  FINANCIAL MECHANISM

This item was divided into two sub- items.

(a) Implementation of Article 11, paragraphs 1-4 -             (i) Guidance on the operating entities, including programme  priorities, eligibility criteria and policies and 'agreed  full incremental costs': This section outlines the duties  and issues of the financial mechanism. It also contains  guidance on priorities for funding, eligibility criteria for  receiving funds, and the determination of 'agreed full  incremental costs' (A/AC.237/Misc.41).

Developed and developing countries disagreed over how  specific the Group's guidance should be regarding the nature  of developing projects to be funded. Developed countries  wanted to maintain draft language that listed specific  elements of national programmes, such as mitigation measures  and an inventory of sources and sinks. Developing countries,  however, stressed the need for generality at this stage. The  Group agreed to retain only a general reference to  activities of the developing country Parties to address  climate change.

On mobilization of funds, Parties disagreed on whether the  proposed language shifted responsibility for ensuring the  predictability of resources onto the funding mechanism. The  EU offered substitute language that clarified the  mechanism's role, which was amended and accepted.

On activities undertaken outside the framework of the  financial mechanism, some Parties wanted to delete the  entire paragraph because it was irrelevant, and others  thought it 'micro-managed' the operating entity. Developing  countries were particularly concerned about retaining  language that prohibits new forms of conditionality, while  developed countries preferred retaining instruction on  information from financial institutions outside the  Convention.

On programme priorities, Parties disagreed over the type of  activities to be assisted and the manner of assistance.  Developed countries argued that funding should not go to new  or existing institutions, but rather to discrete projects.  Developing countries, however, stressed the need for funding  new institutions to facilitate technology transfer. It was  agreed that the operating entity should finance the  formulation of national programmes addressing climate change  issues in developing countries.

Little progress was made on technology transfer, as well as  'full incremental costs.' Many developing countries   commented that they wanted to be enabled, not simply given  technology. China suggested that the Secretariat develop an  inventory of technology transferable free of costs, but many  developed country Parties objected that this was premature.

On the communication of information by non-Annex I Parties,  developing countries stressed the need for guidelines to  ensure compatibility.  Some wanted the freedom to develop  broad guidelines according to their capabilities, and others  stated they had no resource base to build upon and requested  at least some type of guidance.

(ii) Modalities for the functioning of operational linkages  between the COP and the operating entity or entities of the  financial mechanism: The Group did not make much progress on  the determination of funding needs. Parties generally agreed  that there should be a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)  between the operating entity and the COP. Both developed and  developing countries stressed the need for clear roles  between the two bodies for funding decisions and  reconsideration of those decisions. The Group recommended  that the Committee adopt A/AC.237/WG.II/ L.10, which  requests the Secretariat of the Convention to consult with  the Secretariat of the GEF to draft arrangements for  consideration by the SBI.

(b) Maintenance of the interim arrangements referred to in  Article 21, paragraph 3: Working Group II reviewed a report  by the GEF on the interim arrangements, which asserted that  the GEF fulfills all the requirements stipulated in the  Convention.

Developed countries argued that the restructured and  replenished GEF had met all of the criteria for the  operating entity and urged that it be established as the  permanent entity entrusted with the financial mechanism.  Developing country Parties expressed dissatisfaction with  their representation within the GEF and added that the GEF  needed additional funds before it could be designated the  permanent entity. They also reminded developed countries  that the Group did not have to make a decision regarding the  GEF's permanent status at this meeting.

The INC adopted document A/AC.237/WG.II/L. 9, recommending   that the GEF continue as the interim entity, with a review  in four years.

### AGENDA ITEM 9 - PROVISION TO DEVELOPING COUNTRY PARTIES OF  TECHNICAL AND FINANCIAL SUPPORT

Working Group II reviewed  progress reports on the three elements of the Climate Change  cooperation programme (CC:COPE), including the Climate  Convention information exchange programme (CC:INFO), the  Climate Convention training programme (CC:TRAIN) and several  technical coordination and advisory activities. Developing  countries raised questions regarding the type of assistance  to be provided, the composition of staffs and whether the  programmes involved technology transfer. Developed countries  stressed the importance of financing programme efforts,  documentation of expenditures and results. The Group  recommended an addition to the report of the Committee that  summarizes the discussion and requests the Interim   Secretariat to continue to facilitate the provision of  technical and financial support.

## CLOSING PLENARY

The final session of the Plenary convened at 12:00 pm on  Friday, 17 February 1995. The Chair first invited the Co- Chair of Working Group I, Cornelia Quennet-Thielen  (Germany), to present the draft decisions prepared by the  Working Group. She announced that on review of information,  methodological issues and subsidiary bodies, the Group  agreed to recommend three decisions to be adopted at COP-1.  On the two remaining issues, which are much more political - review of adequacy of commitments and joint implementation -  the Group could not agree on comparable full-fledged  decisions. Thus, the Group recommended that further  discussion take place at COP-1. The Plenary then adopted  A/AC.237/WG.I/L.27 on the first review of information  communicated by Parties, as orally amended. Poland, Estonia  and Hungary reserved their right to revisit this decision in  Berlin.

On the review of adequacy of commitments,  A/AC.237/WG.I/L.28, the EU considered the decision to be  entirely insufficient stating that every successive IPCC  report has demonstrated that the commitments in the  Convention are inadequate. This statement was supported by  Germany, the US, Samoa, Australia, Hungary, New Zealand,  Canada, Norway, Japan, Argentina, Switzerland, Trinidad and  Tobago (on behalf of AOSIS) and Equatorial Guinea. Kuwait  responded that the Parties must also address the  socioeconomic impacts of current commitments and any future  commitments and that it was premature to decide if the  commitments are inadequate because there is insufficient  information. The Plenary then adopted L.28, as orally  amended by the Co-Chair.

The Plenary also adopted A/AC.237/WG.I/L.29, on criteria for  joint implementation, A/AC.237/WG.I/L.25, on methodological  issues, and A/AC.237/WG.I/L.26, on the roles of subsidiary  bodies.

The Co-Chair of Working Group II, James T. Stovall III,  (Micronesia) introduced the draft decisions submitted by the  Working Group. He noted that the decisions on technology  transfer were limited by the lack of time available to the  Working Group. The Plenary then adopted the following  decisions: A/AC.237/WG.II/L.9, on maintenance of the interim  arrangements with the GEF; A/AC.237/WG.II/L.10, on  modalities for the functioning of operational linkages  between the COP and the entity or entities operating the  financial mechanism;  A/AC.237/WG.II/L.11, on initial  guidance on policies, programme priorities and eligibility  criteria to the operating entity or entities of the  financial mechanism; and A/AC.237/WG.II/L.12, on temporary  arrangements between the Committee and the GEF.

At 2:15 pm, the Chair suspended the meeting to allow for  further consultations on the Rules of Procedure. The Plenary  did not resume until 4:40 pm, when the Chair announced that  there was still no agreement. He recommended that the   Committee send the documentation on the rules, including  A/AC.237/L.22/Rev.2, to the COP for its consideration.  Kuwait, supported by Iran, Saudi Arabia, Libya and Nigeria,  announced that it would not adopt the Rules of Procedure  until all rules are agreed upon. The Russian Federation  stated that if the COP modifies the standard UN practice on  languages, the Rules of Procedure cannot be adopted. The  Philippines, on behalf of the G-77 and China, said that they  do not want to eliminate any of the six languages in Rule  54. The Plenary decided however, that the INC could  recommend electing the head of the host country's delegation  as President at the start of COP-1.

The Rapporteur, Maciej Sadowski (Poland) then introduced the  draft report, as contained in A/AC.237/L.24 and three  addenda. He went through the report section-by-section. The  first section that generated any comment was Section VIII.  A.  Rules of Procedure of the Conference of the Parties, and  of the subsidiary bodies established by the Convention.  Algeria, China, Kuwait, Iran, Saudi Arabia and Benin did not  agree with listing the number of countries in favor of each  alternative in Rule 42 (Voting). India, supported by  Venezuela, proposed replacing '22 countries' and 'eight  countries' with 'some countries.' The Russian Federation and  the EU supported the text as drafted, because it shows that  a larger number preferred Alternative A to B. The Chair said  that he had listed the numbers because he wanted to enable  'people on the street' to understand the report of the  Committee. Since the consensus was to maintain the  'conservative lack of transparency,' he said that the text  will be revised, as proposed by India.

After adopting the entire report, the Chair and the  Executive Secretary expressed their thanks to everyone for  their cooperation and work over the past four years. The  Chair then announced that in order to avoid further speeches  he would adjourn the meeting. With this final gavel, the  Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee for a Framework  Convention on Climate Change came to a close.

# A BRIEF ANALYSIS OF INC-11

The INC for a Framework Convention on Climate Change is the  first negotiating body of an international environmental  convention that continued to meet after the Convention was  adopted. The convening of six additional sessions of the INC  enabled delegates to begin the difficult process of  operationalizing the Convention even before it entered into  force.

This phase of the negotiating process is often referred to  as 'post agreement negotiations.' The purpose of post- agreement negotiations is to continue the dialogue to push  forward the development of the Convention and its  implementation. These additional negotiations are often  aimed at settling disputes, handing misunderstandings,  dealing with future adjustments to the Convention and the  management of the day-to-day governance of the Convention  among the signatories.

On the eve of the first meeting of the Conference of the   Parties, it is useful to see what these post-agreement  negotiations have accomplished thus far. At INC-11 delegates  seasoned from previous INCs were faced with an agenda full  of items that needed urgent consideration and action prior  to COP-1. As the first week wore on, the initial mood of  cautious optimism was eroded by the ensuing gridlock in  discussions on criteria for joint implementation, adequacy  of commitments, voting rules, and the location of the  Permanent Secretariat. By the second week it was clear that  although some progress had been made in clearing the  procedural undergrowth, to prepare for Berlin several  matters would have to be postponed until COP-1: Rule 22  (Officers) and Rule 42 (Voting) in the Rules of Procedure,  criteria on joint implementation and review of adequacy of  commitments by Annex I Parties. It was hoped that clear  decisions would be made on voting rules, given the  additional implications of negotiations on a protocol, and  the location of the Permanent Secretariat. It is useful to  note that in negotiations on the Biodiversity Convention the  COP was unable to resolve both of these matters. Despite  valiant efforts to resist the trend set in the Biodiversity  COP, Climate Change negotiators seem caught in the same  dilemma.

While there were some acrimonious exchanges on the issues of  review of adequacy of commitments and JI, INC-11  demonstrated that there was general agreement that the GEF  should continue to be the interim entity entrusted with the  operation of the financial mechanism. Some progress was made  in providing guidance to the financial mechanism regarding  programme priorities, policies and eligibility criteria, but  the issues of technology transfer and 'full incremental  costs' did not see any substantial progress. Substantive  discussion also occurred on the roles of the subsidiary  bodies. It is left to COP-1 to provide a new impetus for  negotiations and constructive work on the following issues.

## INTRODUCTION OF THE AOSIS PROTOCOL  AND THE GERMAN PROPOSAL

During the first week of INC-11, Trinidad and Tobago, on  behalf of AOSIS, introduced a draft protocol submitted in  September 1994, and Germany also introduced a proposal for  further elements of a protocol. The AOSIS draft protocol  does not impose any additional obligations on developing  countries and emphasizes that the burden of achieving the  Convention's objectives rests with the developed States. The  heart of the protocol is its targets for greenhouse gas  reductions (Article 3) based on the 'Toronto target,' which  requires Annex I Parties to the Protocol to reduce their C02  emissions by 2005 to a level at least 20% below that of 1990  and to establish timetables for controlling emissions of  other gases. The German proposal suggests a consensus on a  commitment by Annex I Parties to stabilize their C02  emissions, individually or jointly, at 1990 levels by 2000.  The German proposal included a provision that would work  toward further reporting commitments for non-Annex I  countries, 'and commitments to limit the rise of  emissions  in the case of certain more advanced developing countries.'  The G-77 and China repeatedly refuted the possible  implication of the proposal, which  would extend their  commitments and/or create a new class of developing  countries.

The introduction of the AOSIS protocol and the German  proposal have significant implications not only for the  negotiations but also for the future implementation of the  Convention. Despite an initial discussion in the Plenary,  the debate of the protocol was confined to the discussion on  adequacy of commitments.  Developing countries expressed  concerns about a protocol given the inability of Annex I  Parties to meet their current commitments. Initially only  some developing countries expressed support for the AOSIS  draft protocol while OPEC countries and China said that  protocol negotiations were premature since neither the best  available scientific information nor the review of Annex I  Parties communications provided a sufficient basis for  negotiations.

OECD countries in general supported a comprehensive protocol  on all GHGs, stating that negotiations should begin at COP- 1. The US said only that it supported the need to consider   the need to consider 'new aims' through negotiations under  the SBI for the post-2000 period, generally avoiding the  word 'protocol.' Nordic countries supported stronger action. Countries with  economies in transition said it was premature to take on new  commitments and that the German proposal did not include  provisions for them. Debate revolved largely around how the  protocol and the proposal would be dealt with and reflected  in the report of INC-11. Despite a cautious start, towards  the end of INC-11 there was considerable vocal support for a  mechanism to begin negotiations on the AOSIS draft protocol,  but little evidence that the proponents of the protocol  could achieve consensus to initiate these negotiations.  Debate at INC-11 confirmed the general agreement that the  current commitments are inadequate, but the language to  'take appropriate action' at COP-1 was the strongest to  which delegates to agree. It remains to be seen how  delegates will respond to both initiatives at the upcoming  COP and whether more serious consideration and discussion  will be attempted.

## REVIEW OF ADEQUACY OF COMMITMENTS

The discussion on this issue was more positive than expected  after INC-10 where the debate was more negatively charged.  The fact that no substantive discussion was undertaken on  the AOSIS protocol limited the debate on the adequacy of  commitments. Even though developed countries agreed that  current commitments were inadequate, they chose not to push  the terms of the debate further. Again, developing countries  interpreted any attempts to consider new commitments as a  possible move to impose new responsibilities on them, and  argued that Annex I Parties must first meet their current  obligations. At INC-11 it appeared as if both developed and  developing countries resisted the temptation to engage in   substantive discussions on the adequacy of commitments,  preferring to go along with compromise language, at least  until COP-1. The last week of the INC demonstrated that  entrenched positions resulted in arduous negotiations with  little movement from either side.

## REVIEW OF NATIONAL COMMUNICATION BY ANNEX I PARTIES

There was extensive debate on the review of Annex I Parties'  national communications. Developing countries expressed  disappointment with the 15 submissions to date stating that  many lacked adequate documentation and evaluation of  policies. The key points of disagreement among developed  countries were the periodicity of emissions inventory  updates, which GHGs should be inventoried, and whether the  Parties should be named in the synthesis report. Some Annex  I Parties argued for annual C02 emissions inventory updates  with the optional inclusion of other GHGs, others argued for  the inclusion of all GHGs, requested flexibility on  submissions and did not support naming Parties, while still  others argued that the synthesis report indicated that more  action was needed to meet the Convention's objectives. A few  developed countries urged the development of guidelines for  national communications from developing country Parties.  Developing countries warned again that this should not  become a means of imposing new commitments on non-Annex I  Parties.

## THE ROLES OF SUBSIDIARY BODIES

The significant part of the discussion revolved around the  relationship between subsidiary bodies and non-FCCC bodies.  The role of the IPCC was the principal subject of debate  with divergent views expressed on maintaining its scientific  objectivity. Developing countries argued that the SBSTA  should serve as the link between the SBSTA and the COP and  that the SBI not assume responsibility for the SBSTA, since  they are both parallel bodies under the Convention.  Developed countries endorsed the SBSTA's two technical  advisory panels but disagreed on whether the review of  adequacy of commitments should be given to an ad hoc  committee, an ad hoc committee under the guidance of the  SBI, or be the SBI's responsibility. A proposed technical  panel to consult with the business community also fueled  heated exchanges. Environmental NGOs expressed serious  concern regarding the move to undermine the scientific  findings and role of the IPCC through the lobbying efforts  of some industry groups and certain developing countries.

Progress was made in detailing the terms of reference for  the SBSTA and the SBI. The new proposal on the business  consultative mechanism was placed in the list of matters to  be considered by the subsidiary bodies. The compromise is  that a workshop in 1966, open to all Parties and interested  NGOs, will discuss the need for and possible scope of non- governmental advisory committees and/or a business  consultative mechanism and report to COP-2.

## CRITERIA FOR JOINT IMPLEMENTATION

The issue of Joint Implementation was first placed on the  agenda at INC-7. It is clear from Article 4.2(a) that JI can  take place between Annex I Parties. Discussion on broadening  JI to include developing countries was first initiated at  INC-8, raising developing countries' fears about its  potential implications and impacts. Developing countries  have tended to view JI with varying degrees of caution,  concerned that Annex I Parties not use JI as a means to  avoid national action to meet current commitments under the  Convention. The additional concern was that JI be  supplemental and not substitute for funding and financial  mechanisms established under the Convention.

Although some developed countries have been pushing hard to  secure endorsement of a joint implementation pilot phase,  the most notable shift at INC-11 was the initial position of  certain developing countries away from cautious skepticism  towards cautious acceptance. There were some developing  countries who favored limiting the JI pilot phase to Annex I  Parties and others who were more amenable to the voluntary  and equitable participation of developing countries viewing  it as a means of technology transfer. However, as INC-11  continued, developing countries positions on JI once again  hardened because of old fears that JI be a means to avoid  fulfilling Annex I Parties commitments resurfaced. There  appeared to be considerable support for avoiding the thorny  problem of 'credits' by excluding the allotment of  greenhouse gas abatement credits during the pilot phase.  Overall, the negotiations on JI reflected a strategy to  carry differences forward to the COP. The procedural  compromise was that the proposals of the G-77 and China, the  EU and the US will be transmitted to the COP for further  consideration.

## LOCATION OF THE PERMANENT SECRETARIAT

As with the Biodiversity Convention, delegates have had  difficulty deciding the location of the Permanent  Secretariat. Practical, financial and political  considerations have all come into play as delegates listened  to the offers from Canada (Toronto), Germany (Bonn),  Switzerland (Geneva) and Uruguay (Montevideo). While some  delegates' initial preferences resulted from a fairly  deliberative process, others came to INC-11 without clear  positions. There was also concern that postponing the  decision until COP-1, would leave no choice but to place the  Secretariat in Bonn. Others felt that postponing the  decision until after COP-1 would call the scheduling and  location of COP-2 into question. The Bureau's suggestion  that the four potential host countries consult and reach an  agreement among themselves, may be the solution, but in the  end could be at a high cost to the victor.

## FINANCIAL MECHANISM

Perhaps some of the greatest progress during the interim  period was made in the area of the financial mechanism. At  INC-11, delegates agreed that the GEF shall continue to be  the international entity entrusted with the operation of the  financial mechanism. While there is still doubt among some   developing countries that the restructured GEF has met all  of the requirements stipulated in the Convention, there was  no argument that the interim arrangements should be  maintained for the next four years. Delegates also asked the  Secretariat of the Convention, in consultation with the  Secretariat of the GEF, to prepare draft arrangements  between the COP and the financial mechanism. The draft  arrangements will be introduced at COP-1 and adopted at COP- 2. With respect to guidance on policies, programme  priorities and eligibility criteria, delegates agreed that  the financial mechanism should support agreed activities to  mitigate climate change, in addition to the national  programmes to address climate change. If the INC had not met  during the interim period, it is possible that many of these  issues would not have been agreed upon until COP-2,  effectively postponing the operation of the financial  mechanism and many national programmes to address climate  change. The agreements reached at INC-10 and 11 should  facilitate the effective implementation of the Convention  beginning at COP-1.

## RULES OF PROCEDURE

Since the INC was unable to adopt the Rules of Procedure and  send them to Berlin as a fait accompli, the COP will have a  number of initial procedural hurdles to overcome before it  can even discuss some of the important substantive issues.  The three major outstanding issues are composition of the  Bureau, voting procedures, and official languages. With  regard to the first two, the oil producing developing States  stood firm on language that would give them a seat on the  Bureau and force all protocols to be adopted by consensus.  These two amendments would, in effect, negate the AOSIS seat  on the Bureau and ensure that the AOSIS draft protocol, as  currently drafted, would have difficulty being adopted  because it is unlikely to achieve consensus. For many  observers, the inability to reach consensus on these rules  raises suspicion that the sole purpose of some Parties'  accession to the Convention was to play an obstructionist  role. The challenge for Berlin is to ensure that there is  swift agreement on these rules so that COP can begin to  address the challenging issues related to climate change.

## CHALLENGES FOR BERLIN

Many delegates, NGOs and other observers left New York with  a feeling that INC-11 had failed to take the necessary  forward-looking action with regard to the AOSIS protocol,  strengthening commitments and joint implementation.  Nevertheless, the last six sessions of the INC have made  great progress in beginning the difficult process of  operationalizing and strengthening the Convention. On the  eve of COP-1, the Parties are in a position to quickly adopt  most of the procedural matters and immediately turn to  ensuring that the Convention is effectively implemented and  strengthened. While the lack of consensus on the Rules of  Procedure may still hinder substantive progress in Berlin,  the work of the INC on subsidiary bodies, the financial  mechanism, reporting and methodological issues should enable   this to be one of the most productive first COP in  environmental convention history.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR IN BERLIN

### CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES

The first session of the COP of  the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change will be held  in Berlin from 28 March - 7 April 1995. During the first  segment of the COP, from 28 March - 4 April 1995, delegates  will continue negotiations on any issues that were not  resolved at INC-11. The ministerial segment of the COP will  be held from 5-7 April 1995. The list of speakers for the  ministerial segment opened on 15 February 1995. Statements  will be limited to those by ministers of the States  participating at the first COP and heads of delegations of  Parties to the Convention. The agenda will be prepared and  circulated by the Secretariat in advance of the COP.

### NGO ACTIVITIES

The NGO Community is planning a large number  of events to coincide with COP-1 in Berlin. For further  information about these events, contact Klimaforum 95,  Behrenstrasse 23, 10117 Berlin, Germany. E-mail  <klimaforum@lpn-b.comlink.apc.org>; Tel. +49-30/202/ 203-0;  Fax. +49-30/202 203-33.