---
title: "SUMMARY OF THE INTER-REGIONAL WORKSHOP OF THE CONSULTATIVE GROUP OF EXPERTS ON INITIAL NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS FROM PARTIES NOT INCLUDED IN ANNEX I TO THE UNFCCC: 19-22 MARCH 2001"
id: enb12164e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12164e
date: 2001-03-22
abstract: "The Inter-Regional Workshop of the Consultative Group of Experts  (CGE) on Initial National Communications from Parties not included  in Annex I to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change  (UNFCCC) met from 19-22 March 2001, in Panama City, Panama. The  CGE was established by decision 8/CP.5 with the aim of improving  national communications for non-Annex I Parties. The CGE is  composed of 24 experts, five from each non-Annex I region (Africa,  Asia, and Latin America and the Caribbean), six Annex I Party  experts, plus three experts from regional organizations."
---

The workshop was organized by members of the CGE in collaboration  with the UNFCCC Secretariat and the National Authority of the  Environment of Panama (ANAM) with the main objective to provide  advice to the members of the CGE in performing the tasks set out  by paragraph 5 of decision 8/CP.5. The workshop aimed to pull  together conclusions and recommendations of three regional  workshops held in 2000 in order to provide specific  recommendations on improving the national communications of non- Annex I Parties to be included in the review of the UNFCCC  guidelines, annexed in decision 10/CP.2. The workshop also aimed  to: discuss the purpose of the work of the CGE; provide an  opportunity to share experiences between regions on the  preparation of national communications; strengthen the network of  the regional groups; and provide an opportunity to discuss the  different elements comprising the national communications.

Four working groups discussed the outcomes from the regional  workshops on: the preparation of greenhouse gas inventories;  vulnerability and adaptation (V&A) assessments; identification of  greenhouse gas abatement options; and cross cutting issues,  including education, training, public awareness; information and  networking.  The working group discussions resulted in draft  recommendations for the review of the UNFCCC guidelines on  preparing non-Annex I national communications.  This will be  presented by the CGE for consideration at COP-7, scheduled to be  held from 29 October to 9 November 2001, in Marrakech, Morocco.  The workshop was followed by two days of meetings of the CGE.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE UNFCCC AND THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

Climate change is considered one of the most serious threats to  the sustainability of the world's environment, human health and  well-being, and the global economy. Mainstream scientists agree  that the Earth's climate is being affected by the build-up of  greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide, caused by human  activities. Despite some lingering uncertainties, a majority of  scientists believe that precautionary and prompt action is  necessary.

The international response to climate change took shape with the  development of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate  Change (UNFCCC). Adopted in 1992, the UNFCCC sets out a framework  for action aimed at stabilizing atmospheric concentrations of  greenhouse gases at a level that would prevent anthropogenic  (human-induced) actions from leading to 'dangerous interference'  with the climate system. The UNFCCC entered into force on 21 March  1994, 90 days after the receipt of the 50th ratification. To date,  it has received 186 instruments of ratification, acceptance,  approval or accession from States. Since it entered into force,  six meetings of the Conference of the Parties (COP) have taken  place, as well as numerous workshops and meetings of the UNFCCC's  subsidiary bodies - the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI)  and the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice  (SBSTA).

### THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

The Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate,  established by COP-1, met between 1995 and 1997 to reach agreement  on a further step in efforts to combat climate change. Following  intense negotiations, delegates to COP-3, which was held in Kyoto,  Japan, in December 1997, agreed to a Protocol to the UNFCCC that  commits developed countries and countries making the transition to  a market economy to achieve quantified targets for decreasing  their emissions of greenhouse gases. These countries, known under  the UNFCCC as Annex I Parties, committed themselves to reducing  their overall emissions of six greenhouse gases by at least 5%  below 1990 levels over the period between 2008 and 2012, with  differentiated targets for most of these countries. The Protocol  also provides the basis for three mechanisms to assist Annex I  Parties in meeting their national targets cost-effectively - an  emissions trading system, joint implementation (JI) of emissions- reduction projects between Annex I Parties, and a Clean  Development Mechanism (CDM) to encourage joint projects between  Annex I and non-Annex I Parties.

While delegates in Kyoto agreed to these emissions reductions  targets and methods, it was left for subsequent meetings to decide  on most of the rules and operational details that will determine  how these cuts are achieved and how countries' efforts are  measured and assessed. Although many countries have signed the  Protocol, the majority is waiting until these operational details  are negotiated before deciding whether or not to ratify. To enter  into force, the Protocol must be ratified by 55 Parties to the  UNFCCC, including Annex I Parties representing at least 55% of the  total carbon dioxide emissions for 1990. To date, only 32 Parties  have ratified the Protocol.

### THE BUENOS AIRES PLAN OF ACTION

The Fourth Conference of the  Parties (COP-4) met in Buenos Aires, Argentina, in November 1998,  to set out a work schedule for reaching agreement on the  operational details of the Protocol and for strengthening  implementation of the UNFCCC itself. This work schedule was  outlined in a document called the Buenos Aires Plan of Action. The  critical deadline under the Plan of Action was COP-6, where  Parties were to attempt to reach agreement on a package of issues.  Critical Protocol-related issues needing resolution included rules  relating to the mechanisms, a regime for monitoring Parties'  compliance with their commitments, and accounting methods for  national emissions and emissions reductions. Rules on crediting  countries for removing carbon from the atmosphere through planting  trees, and possibly other measures, were also to be addressed.  Issues under the UNFCCC requiring resolution included questions of  capacity building, the transfer and development of technology, and  assistance to those developing countries that are especially  vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change or to actions  taken by industrialized countries to combat climate change.

### PREPARATIONS FOR COP-6

COP-6 was preceded by numerous formal and  informal meetings and consultations held during 1999 and 2000. The  UNFCCC subsidiary bodies held their tenth sessions in Bonn,  Germany, from 31 May-11 June 1999, and began the formal process of  fulfilling the Buenos Aires Plan of Action. This work was  continued at COP-5 and at the eleventh sessions of the subsidiary  bodies, held in Bonn from 25 October-5 November 1999. During the  first few months of 2000, several UNFCCC technical workshops on  key issues under the Plan of Action were held to assist the  process leading to COP-6. Work resumed at a formal level with the  twelfth sessions of the UNFCCC subsidiary bodies, held from 12-16  June 2000, in Bonn, and preceded by one week of informal meetings.  At this meeting, participants developed negotiating text on  critical issues such as the mechanisms and compliance.

### SB-13 PART I

Informal consultations and workshops were held  during July and August 2000, followed by the first part of the  thirteenth sessions of the subsidiary bodies (SB-13), held from  11-15 September 2000 in Lyon, France, and again preceded by a week  of informal meetings. During the informal meetings and the first  part of SB-13, delegates discussed text for decisions covering a  range of technical and political issues, with the aim of preparing  text for a comprehensive agreement at COP-6.

Many delegates and observers at SB-13 Part I expressed concern at  the slow progress and significant amount of work that remained for  delegates at The Hague. Political positions on the key issues  remained entrenched, with little indication of willingness to  compromise or move forward. While negotiating text emerged on the  key elements of the Plan of Action, significant disagreements  remained.

### INTERSESSIONAL CONSULTATIONS AFTER SB-13 PART I

Several informal  meetings and consultations were held following SB-13. These  included consultations on Articles 5 (methodological issues), 7  (communication of information) and 8 (review of information),  land-use, land-use change and forestry, compliance, mechanisms,  adverse effects, and least developed countries (LDCs), as well as  informal high-level consultations held in early October and  chaired by Jan Pronk, the Dutch Environment Minister and  President-designate of COP-6. These meetings resulted in some  further progress. However, with such a complex array of political  and technical issues on the table and an emphasis on achieving  agreement on the entire  'package' of issues under negotiation,  many observers prior to COP-6 suggested that accommodating all  countries' interests and aims could prove difficult.

### COP-6

COP-6 met in The Hague, the Netherlands, from 13-25  November 2000. During the first week, the resumed SB-13 reconvened  and concluded work by adopting a number of draft conclusions  containing text for decisions by COP-6. However, much of the text  transmitted by the subsidiary bodies to the COP lacked complete  agreement by delegates.

During the second week, COP-6 President Pronk attempted to  facilitate progress on the many disputed political and technical  issues by convening high-level informal Plenary sessions to  address the key political issues, which he grouped into four  'clusters' or 'boxes,' as follows: (a) capacity building,  technology transfer, adverse effects and guidance to the Global  Environment Facility (GEF); (b) mechanisms; (c) land-use, land-use  change and forestry; and (d) compliance, policies and measures,  and accounting, reporting and review under Articles 5, 7 and 8.

Ministers and other senior negotiators convened in four groups to  negotiate these clusters in an attempt to reach consensus.  However, toward the end of the week negotiations appeared stalled  and President Pronk distributed a Note containing his proposals on  key issues in an attempt to force a breakthrough that would lead  to consensus. After almost 36 hours of intense talks on the  President's proposals, negotiators did not achieve a breakthrough,  with supplementarity, compliance and land-use, land-use change and  forestry proving to be particular sticking points. Delegates  agreed to suspend COP-6 and expressed a willingness to resume  their work in 2001.

# REPORT OF THE WORKSHOP

On Monday, 19 March, Emilio Sempris, ANAM, opened the workshop. He  welcomed participants and stressed the importance of this process  for non-Annex I Parties that are preparing their national  communications. He highlighted the opportunity that the workshop  provided to review countries' existing national climate change  programmes and identify problems and analytical and methodological  tools required to prepare the national communications. He added  that the workshop could help experts share and exchange  experiences on the preparation of greenhouse gas inventories and  find new formulas for the preparation of national communications.

Martha Perdomo (UNFCCC Secretariat) described the activities of  the non-Annex I implementation sub-programme and the regional  workshops held in Mexico, Thailand and Kenya in 2000. She  highlighted the programme's mandate to provide specific assistance  to non-Annex I Parties on the implementation of the Convention.  Jessica Faieta, UNDP Panama, described the support provided to  Panama to generate their first national communication, which  contains a greenhouse gas inventory, mitigation options and an  initial evaluation of the vulnerability to the adverse impacts of  climate change. She explained that the national communication  would serve as an indication of the implementation of the UNFCCC.  She highlighted continued UNDP support for developing countries'  efforts to undertake measures for the implementation of the  Convention.

Gonzalo Menendez, Deputy Administrator of ANAM, recalled the goals  of the UNFCCC and the commitments of the international community  to adopt preventive actions and adaptation measures, including the  preparation of national communications. He stressed the need of  developing countries to create national capacities to achieve  their commitments and sustainable development. He noted that this  workshop could be useful to reduce scientific uncertainties on  climate change and to use the results and lessons from previous  regional experiences.

## PRESENTATIONS OF COUNTRIES' EXPERIENCES ON THE MAIN ISSUES

On Monday, 19 March, participants heard presentation of countries'  experiences in preparing specific sections of their national  communications, followed by discussions.

### GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORIES

Clifford Mahlung (Jamaica) presented  Jamaica's experience in preparing its national greenhouse gas  inventory. He outlined the problems and constraints related to  data availability for the energy and industrial, waste management  and land use change and forestry sectors. For the energy and  industrial sectors, he said Jamaica had good activity data on fuel  consumption, but this data was not reported by sector. He outlined  several strengths and constraints found in the estimation of the  activity data for this sector, including for the estimation of  transport data and biomass data, lime production, soda ash and  asphalt. He indicated that emissions factors were well defined for  petroleum products, but not others. For the waste management  sector, he indicated that the data were inadequate. He also  underscored that there were insufficient data for the land use  change and forestry sector. He concluded by summarizing several  measures to improve the data, including the creation of an Office  of Utilities Regulation, a revision of the Petroleum Quality  Control Act Regulation of 1999, the digitization of Jamaica's  Airport Authority database, the implementation of a national solid  waste programme, the establishment of a national solid waste  management authority, and the establishment of a forest land-use  data bank.

Abdelkrim Ben Mohamed (Niger) gave a presentation on the key  problems during the preparation of Niger's greenhouse gas  inventory. He underscored the importance of considering national  circumstances and considered the Intergovernmental Panel on  Climate Change (IPCC) methodology and particular circumstances to  be the main barriers. He identified problems with accessing data  and underscored the problem with data in unsuitable formats for  the estimation of emissions. He said the IPCC methodology was  lacking in specific situations where there was no provision to  account for or estimate certain types of data. He indicated the  importance of suspended particulate matter in emissions estimates  for West Africa, and underscored the need to account for this in  the inventory. He emphasized the importance of improving national  communications and of the participation of non-Annex I Parties in  the IPCC scientific assessments. He concluded by noting the  existence of local expertise in the field of greenhouse gas  emissions.

### VULNERABILITY AND ADAPTATION ASSESSMENT

Yeshey Penjor (Bhutan)  spoke on V&A assessments. He said it was too early to focus on  science and modern technology for the purpose of these  assessments. He said factors contributing to vulnerability in  Bhutan are related to, inter alia, the impacts of climate change,  such as glacier melting, linked to forest and biodiversity  degradation, flash floods, and an increase in vector-borne  diseases. He underscored the importance of ensuring the  implementation of adaptation policies and stressed the need for  public awareness and strategic development planning. He said the  capacity to understand and address climate change is very  important for planning for poor countries. He concluded that in  the developing country perspective, institutional strengthening,  capacity building and financial support are important elements for  reducing vulnerability.

### GREENHOUSE GAS ABATEMENT ISSUES

Kadio Ahossane (Côte d'Ivoire)  discussed greenhouse gas abatement issues. He highlighted that his  country's forest had diminished from 13 million acres in 1960 to  2.1 million acres in 2000, and indicated the importance of this  fact for emissions abatement. He outlined programmes and measures  implemented in the industry, energy, forestry and agriculture  sectors aimed at reducing emissions. He listed a number of  identified constraints, including: lack of appropriate knowledge  of climate change issues, including national experts; lack of  relevant institutions and facilities; lack of appropriate database  for studies in this domain; inappropriate emission factors as far  as localities are concerned; and lack of available documents  related to climate change issues in languages other than English.  He concluded that a number of challenges that influence the  preparation of national communications remain, such as the need  to: understand and address climate change issues; develop climate  change databases; develop country or regional emissions factors;  improve the technical approach; maintain and expand national  capacity; and raise public awareness and promote the participation  of stakeholders.

### FINANCIAL AND TECHNICAL SUPPORT

Emilio Sempris (Panama) described  his country's work on inventories, V&A and mitigation options. On  greenhouse gas inventories, he described work done on areas such  as energy, industrial processes, solvents, agriculture, land use  and forests and waste management. He highlighted several areas  where further work remains to be done including: the lack or  unavailability of data, and the standardization of information  gathering; the need to strengthen the capacities of different  sectors to record their greenhouse gas emissions and to review the  information collected; the lack of IPCC guidelines on solid waste  management emissions; and the financial and technical issues for  the preparation of the assessment. On mitigation options, he noted  that the preliminary study does not represent the real situation  due to insufficient capacities and data, and suggested  strengthening capacity building and mechanisms for institutional  coordination. He concluded by underlining the need to improve the  institutional framework for the implementation stage, strengthen  capacities and increase database information, involve the  political level at the beginning of the process, and to create a  model suitable to country characteristics.

In the ensuing discussion, participants discussed methodological  issues related to: gathering activity data and the estimation of  greenhouse gas emissions; V&A assessment; climate baseline  preparation; and institutional frameworks and capacities. The  BAHAMAS said climate scenarios are not the core of V&A assessment.  He suggested that more political will is needed to solve technical  problems associated with the preparation of the 'climate  baseline.' PANAMA highlighted the lack of data and access for  public participation as key problems in the preparation process.  He suggested incorporating social scientists into the process.  COLOMBIA said the preparation process is not a priority within  governments and noted the amount of time spent on building local  capacity. BOLIVIA stressed the need for more work on adaptation,  particularly the development of a methodology to formulate  strategies that incorporate economic value.

## OVERVIEW OF IPCC WGII TAR AND REPORTS OF REGIONAL WORKSHOPS

On Monday afternoon, 19 March, participants were given an overview  of the IPCC Third Assessment Report (TAR) and of the regional  workshops CGE for Africa, Asia and Latin America and the  Caribbean. Discussion addressed the relevance of the IPCC findings  to the work of the CGE.

### OVERVIEW OF IPCC TAR REPORT

Graham Sem (UNFCCC) presented an  overview of the IPCC Working Group II (Impacts, Adaptation and  Vulnerability) TAR, explaining that the report used observations  and model projections on global surface temperature increase and  sea level rise, warming variation by region, with increases and  decreases in precipitation and changes in variability of climate.  He outlined the contents of the chapters, including: an overview  of impacts, adaptation and vulnerability to climate change;  methods and tools; development and application of scenarios;  impacts on systems such as water resources, ecosystems, coastal  zones and marine ecosystems, human settlements, energy and  industry, insurance and other financial services and human health;  and the regional focus.

Among the emerging findings, he highlighted, inter alia: the  effect of regional climate changes and temperature increases on  many physical and biological systems; the effects of floods and  droughts, demographic shifts and land-use changes in some human  systems; the irreversible damage of some natural systems due to  their limited adaptive capacity and according to the magnitude and  the rate of climate change; the sensitivity and vulnerability of  some areas to climate change varying with geographic location,  social, economic and environmental conditions; and projected  adverse impacts, such as the reduction in crop yields, decreased  water availability in water scarce regions, increase in number of  people exposed to vector-borne diseases and water-borne diseases  and heat stress, and increase in energy demand. He also noted that  climate change would bring some beneficial impacts and highlighted  the need to quantify the risks and possibly irreversible impacts  of projected changes in climate extremes.

Sem presented the conclusions highlighting: the need for V&A  assessments; the adaptation to climate change as a key feature of  development plans; the vulnerability of developing countries,  particularly the least developed countries, to adapt to climate  change and other stresses; and the need to complement mitigation  efforts with adaptation.

In the ensuing discussion, participants exchanged ideas on several  issues of the report. SENEGAL suggested the improvement of  national authorities involvement in the work of the IPCC. The  NETHERLANDS noted that the TAR does not mention costs of  adaptation. THAILAND recalled that the IPCC provides guidelines  for the cost of impacts. AUSTRALIA suggested analyzing how climate  variability affects human systems in the future. ANTIGUA AND  BARBUDA noted the difficulties posed by dividing the process into  different stages, particularly for funding required activities,  and suggested addressing uncertainty and adaptation strategies and  integrating adaptation into development plans. EGYPT suggested  devoting more attention to projections on increased energy  requirements. EL SALVADOR underscored the importance of V&A  assessment for developing countries. TANZANIA highlighted the  methodologies or tools to assess V&A and suggested analyzing their  weaknesses, since these may render them ineffective.

### OVERVIEW OF REPORTS FROM REGIONAL WORKSHOPS

Philip Weech (The  Bahamas) presented a report on the methodological, analytical and  technical issues related to the greenhouse gas inventory  identified in the CGE regional workshops held in 2000 in Mexico  City, Bangkok and Nairobi. On inventories, he said most Parties  had successfully completed them and most work had been based on  the 1996 IPCC Revised Guidelines. He said activity data for some  sectors was unreliable and the bottom-up approach was problematic  due to problems with data sources. He indicated that emissions  factors needed to be developed for several sectors. On financial  and technical support, he stressed the importance of: access to  information; public awareness programmes; translation and  dissemination of good practice guidance; and regional networks for  information and expertise sharing. On V&A assessment, he stressed:  the inadequacy of UNFCCC guidance and the need for this to be  clearly mentioned in the revised guidelines; a general agreement  on the most vulnerable sectors; the lack of cross-sectoral  assessments; the need for capacity building and financial and  technical support; and the importance of research and systematic  observation and networking and information dissemination and  sharing. He underscored the need for integrating V&A assessment  with national planning and the utility of being able to interpret  in a national context. On abatement options, he explained that  this was an on-going process. He outlined the methodology applied  and the sectors included, and stressed the need for capacity  building and financial and technical support for abatement  options. In conclusion, he outlined some remaining barriers, such  as inadequate funds for meeting the reporting requirements and the  need for enhanced education and training for the preparation of  national communications. He stated that, although priorities were  different in the different regions, the problems were essentially  the same.

## PRESENTATIONS OF EXISTING ACTIVITIES TO SUPPORT NATIONAL  COMMUNICATIONS

On Tuesday, 20 March, the UNFCCC Secretariat and the UNDP National  Communications Support Programme (NCSP) gave presentations of the  current activities being undertaken by programmes in support of  the preparation of national communications. Participants engaged  in a discussion after the presentations.

Rodrigo Chaparro, UNFCCC Secretariat, presented a review of  existing activities and programmes to support the preparation of  national communications. The Secretariat compiled the review in  response to a request by the CGE. He said the Secretariat had  attempted to identify such on-going programmes and activities  through a review of documents compiled for reporting on on-going  capacity-building activities, as well as through the Internet and  responses to a questionnaire that examined various aspects of  identified programmes. In conclusion, he highlighted remaining  questions related to these programmes including: how useful the  activities and programmes had been in supporting the preparation  of national communications; what lessons had been learned; and how  the coordination of the programmes could be improved.

Yamil Bonduki, NCSP, gave an overview of the current status and  future activities of the NCSP in 2001-2003. He outlined the main  activities that were covered by the NCSP, including thematic and  regional workshops, a help desk facility for technical assistance  and information, and the implementation of GEF enabling  activities. He said the objectives for the next phase of the NCSP  included programmes addressing technology transfer, systematic  observation, inventories, abatement and adaptation. For each area,  one output would be the training of experts. For technology  transfer, he suggested the additional expected outputs were a  workbook containing a practical framework for assessing and  reporting technological needs. For systematic observation aimed at  the identification of long-term solutions for improving networks  and ensuring linkages with V&A, he indicated that the output would  be workshop materials for reports. For inventories, with the  objective to build capacity for data archiving, updating and  management, he said the outputs would be two regional proposals  and generic material for improving inventories. The abatement  programme would be aimed at improving the analysis by developing a  common framework and developing or identifying tools for  baselines, costing and screening, and the outputs would be such a  framework and tools. For adaptation, the objective would be to  prepare a framework for developing adaptation strategies and to  develop and identify tools for this framework. He indicated that  the next steps would therefore include securing funding for the  next phase of the NCSP, identifying potential regional partners  and coordinating with countries on follow-up activities.

In the ensuing discussion, participants addressed the issue of who  would be responsible for coordinating all of the programmes aimed  at supporting the preparation of national communications. The  NETHERLANDS said there would be a second phase of his country's  climate change support assistance programme and sought advice on  how to select the countries on which to focus. The Secretariat  clarified that it was the mandate of the CGE to recommend how  these programmes could be coordinated in the most effective way.  ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA underscored the potential to have a joint work  programme between the different programmes to pool efforts and  funding.

## PRESENTATIONS OF THE MAIN METHODOLOGICAL AND TECHNICAL ISSUES,  PROBLEMS AND CONSTRAINTS, SOLUTIONS AND BEST PRACTICES

On Tuesday, 20 March, CGE members presented an overview of the  results from the regional workshops on the four themes of  greenhouse gas inventories, V&A assessment, greenhouse gas  abatement issues, and education, public awareness and research and  systematic observation.

### GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORIES

Ayite-Lo Ajavon (Togo), Chair of the  CGE, discussed national greenhouse gas inventories. He described  both the national communications submitted to the UNFCCC  Secretariat and the results of regional discussions on their  process of preparation. He noted that reporting countries  fulfilled their duties to report greenhouse gas inventories  following the UNFCCC guidelines. On the methods used, he said all  Parties followed the 1995 and 1996 IPCC Guidelines to compile  their national greenhouse gas inventories data and some Parties  used the Revised 1996 IPCC guidelines. Regarding gases reported,  he noted that Parties provided information on the most significant  greenhouse gas emission source and sink categories, including  carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions from fuel combustion and industrial  processes, CO2 removals from LULUCF, methane emissions from  agriculture and waste and nitrous oxide from fuel combustion. He  highlighted the lower degree of reporting from some least  developed countries, noting that their overall greenhouse gas  emissions are relatively low. He said some Parties reported  qualitative information on additional gases, as encouraged by the  UNFCCC guidelines, including fully fluorinated compounds and  estimated emissions from international aviation and marine  bunkers.

On tools, he noted that Parties reported more information than the  minimum requested and used more comprehensive tabular formats. He  highlighted the transparency of the inventories containing  worksheets with outlines of detailed calculations for estimated  greenhouse gas emissions and numerical information on aggregate  emission factors. He noted that all Parties identified problems in  preparing their national inventories, including: the lack of  activity data and emission factors; different emission estimates  for the same sector or source categories; and some inconsistencies  between the UNFCCC guidelines and the Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines  regarding disaggregated reporting of the greenhouse gas emissions  by sources and removals by sinks. On institutional arrangements,  he noted that Parties reported that these consisted of the  establishment and operation of inter-institutional committees or  agencies, or teams of national experts from different sectors,  usually coordinated by a leading national institution. He  highlighted the reporting of technical and financial support from  the GEF as a key element in the preparation of inventories.

During the ensuing discussion, participants exchanged views on  issues including specific regional conditions, such as local  emissions factors that influence the preparation of national  communications.

### IMPACTS, VULNERABILITY AND ADAPTATION ASSESSMENTS

Isabelle Niang- Diop (Senegal) described the achievements in the initial national  communications under the theme of V&A assessment. She explained  that all Parties presented V&A assessments, and that Parties  addressed sectors such as agriculture, water resources, coastal  zones and fisheries, terrestrial ecosystems and human health.

On the methodologies, she indicated that most Parties used  different models to analyze diverse climate change scenarios,  without including the analysis of socioeconomic scenarios. She  noted that only half of the initial national communications  included integrated assessments and the vulnerability of non-Annex  I Parties to climate change. She highlighted the main constraints  to the realization of V&A, including: the non-availability of  technical material in all UN languages; the difficulty of  distinguishing between climate change and natural variability; the  lack of regional scenarios; the underestimation of extreme events;  the general lack of material and software, and the adaptation of  these tools to national conditions; and the lack of methodologies  to assess socioeconomic data. She said other constraints reflected  weaknesses of human resources, lack of appropriate institutions  and infrastructure to collect and maintain data, limited funds,  lack of regional cooperation, lack of peer review of the  documents, and political instability.

On the needs expressed, she noted need to have a continuous  process and regional and subregional studies. She said more work  remains to be done on integrated assessments, socioeconomic  assessments and the identification and costing of adaptation  options. She highlighted specific needs on methodological issues,  including: development or adaptation to the national context;  improved access; research development in the field of adaptation;  improved V&A; a better representation of national experts in the  IPCC; vulnerability indicators; and participation in training and  exchange workshops.

Other needs reported included: enhancing human resources and  institutional capacities; using a decentralized approach, as  appropriate; training on GEF procedures; involving university and  research centers; raising policy makers' awareness on climate  change issues; involving stakeholders in this process; and  developing national research centers. She concluded that better  guidelines are needed to give an adequate framework for reporting  and assessment, to allow for a comparison of vulnerability  assessments, and to integrate climate change into national  planning.

In the ensuing discussion, participants raised issues such as GEF  involvement in this process. The UNFCCC Secretariat explained that  the GEF should follow the CGE recommendations. ECUADOR suggested  taking into account regional aspects of adaptation while  fulfilling the CGE's mandate to improve the process of preparation  of national communications. PANAMA underscored the role of  universities in providing continuity to the preparation process  and suggested adopting guidelines to foster linkages with the  institutional infrastructure of Parties.

### GREENHOUSE GAS ABATEMENT ISSUES

Vute Wangwacharakul (Thailand)  presented an overview of the reported greenhouse gas abatement  options. He noted that all Parties had reported some information  about abatement, but that the comprehensiveness of this  information and the methodologies applied varied. He outlined some  gaps in the reporting relating to methodological and data issues,  including: problems with generation of scenarios; estimation of  future emissions; evaluation of abatement options and measures;  availability of data and accessibility to models; and the limited  exchange of information and experiences. He highlighted that good  efforts had been made despite the fact that there was no  requirement to report this information, and said capacity,  resources, databases and information were lacking. He indicated  that possible improvements in methodological issues include the  use of socioeconomic scenarios, economic tools for cost-benefit  analysis, and information networking and exchange on a regional  basis. In conclusion, he stressed the need for human resource and  institutional development, financial assistance and access to  technologies.

### EDUCATION, PUBLIC AWARENESS AND RESEARCH AND SYSTEMATIC  OBSERVATION

Julia Martinez (Mexico) discussed the reported  information on education, public awareness and research and  systematic observation. She reported that the 49 national  communications included in the analysis all faced the same  constraints on the whole. On public awareness, she highlighted the  challenge of raising awareness on climate change in non-Annex I  Parties. She outlined recommendations for how to achieve  awareness, such as strengthening and, where appropriate, building  national capacities to develop public awareness materials. On  education and training, she underscored the need to maintain the  experts once trained for the purpose of the preparation of the  next national communication and the translation of materials into  all UN languages. She recommended that training programmes should  be country driven and coordinated at all levels, and that South- South cooperation be enhanced. On research and systematic  observation, she noted the consensus among Parties that Annex I  Parties should be available for information exchange and technical  cooperation, in order to advise on the collection of the needed  data, including how to manage and analyze it. She noted that  national communications could enhance the process of establishing  observation programmes and that the guidelines should mention  research and systematic observation. In conclusion, she outlined  four aspects to be addressed: the status of monitoring and  networks; national involvement in international and regional  programmes; listing of national institutes and experts active in  the field of climate change; and the additional needs for  systematic observation.

In the discussion, participants highlighted areas of concern.  PANAMA noted that national communications must strengthen  education through the dissemination of the information contained  in them, and similarly that education at all levels of society  will contribute to supporting and strengthening the information.  GERMANY cautioned against placing a strong emphasis on the models  considered in the abatement presentation, since the quality of the  results depends on the quality of the input data. She stressed  that the advantage of simpler approaches to obtaining the results  is that they can be understood more easily. ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA  noted that the goal for non-Annex I Parties is sustainable  development, and that Annex I Parties are under different  obligations regarding abatement. THAILAND underscored the  consideration of national circumstances. AUSTRALIA said the  Convention does not define research and systematic observation and  pointed to the need for this in relation to V&A assessment  studies.

### CROSS CUTTING ISSUES

Networking and Information: Philip Weech  (The Bahamas) presented on cross-cutting issues raised in the  regional workshops. He explained that national communications do  not exist in isolation and reflect a conscious decision by  Parties. He noted that many concerns resulted from the regional  workshops, including issues such as coordination and networking,  institutional strengthening and enabling activities support  programmes. He highlighted barriers for institutional  strengthening, including the lack of national capacity and  continuity of project management teams; weak national frameworks;  and lack of capacity to implement climate change projects. Among  the main findings, he said that Parties had reported: interest in  regional, subregional and national networking; limited human and  financial resources; and underdeveloped systems for data  collection, processing and maintaining systems.

He concluded that the CGE could recommend that: the GEF and other  donor organizations be encouraged to direct resources to enhance  Internet access in developing countries; the UNFCCC Secretariat,  the IPCC and other organizations make climate-related information  and services available through modern communication technologies;  and donor organizations and in-country institutions provide  increased training in the use of the Internet and other cutting- edge information technologies, as appropriate to the circumstances  of individual countries.

National Circumstances and Planning: George Manful (UNFCCC  Secretariat) presented on national circumstances in the process of  preparation of national communications. He highlighted that basic  information, development priorities, objectives and circumstances,  and sustainable development and planning were the main issues  reported. On basic information, he noted that Parties reported  issues such as size and population and the level of development.  He explained that Parties also reported information on, inter alia  geographical characteristics, temperature zones, biodiversity and  rainfall, and their economic background, including gross domestic  product (GDP) and energy intensity of production.

On development priorities, objectives and circumstances, he said  Parties reported on issues such as: food security, including share  of agriculture and GDP, agricultural practices, artisanal and  commercial fishing, and livestock; energy demand and supply; the  size of forests areas; the contribution of mining sector and  tourism to GDP; transport; water resources, embracing surface and  underground water, hydro-power generation and agriculture; and  other sectors such as coral reef preservation, pearl cultivation,  financial and banking sector, waste management and sanitation.

On sustainable development and planning, he noted that Parties  reported on the: integration of climate concerns into national  planning; development of national sustainable plans; establishment  of specific institutional arrangements; promotion of active  stakeholder participation; and enhancement of appropriate  legislation. He concluded that sustainable development and  national planning should go hand-in-hand, and governments should  develop appropriate framework to address these concerns.

In the ensuing discussion, participants exchanged ideas on  national circumstances. NIGER suggested including the  establishment of synergies among environmental conventions as a  cross cutting issue. PANAMA noted how traditional indicators were  changed by climate change and suggested creating new indicators  including socioeconomic and ecological factors. BOLIVIA suggested  that the working groups emphasize the link between the needs  identified at regional workshops and the information that would be  requested in the IPCC TAR, including new guidelines and issues  such as health risks, human security and food security. NCSP  suggested linking information provided by Parties across other  sections of the national communications to balance the reports.  AUSTRALIA suggested recommending the development of better  guidelines. VENEZUELA said that information on national  circumstances should be used to analyze different scenarios of  different sectors and be discussed at national workshops.

## WORKING GROUPS ON NON-ANNEX I NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS

Four working groups met from Tuesday afternoon to Thursday morning  to discuss greenhouse gas inventories; V&A assessment; greenhouse  gas abatement issues; and cross-cutting issues. The working groups  were chaired by the CGE members who had made presentations on each  of these issues, and a rapporteur was assigned to each group. The  four groups used different approaches for their work, but all  focused on discussions based on the presentations heard on Monday  and Tuesday morning. Coverage was limited to the working groups on  V&A assessment and cross-cutting issues.

### GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORY WORKING GROUP

This working group was  chaired by Ayite-Lo Ajavon, Chair of the CGE. The working group  aimed to provide recommendations to the CGE on which experiences  during the preparation of the greenhouse gas inventory should be  highlighted for inclusion in the UNFCCC guidelines for the  preparation of non-Annex I national communications. The working  group considered: analytical, methodological and technical issues  in the preparation and reporting of greenhouse gas inventories,  including best practices and lessons learned; data collection and  the development of local and regional emission factors and  activity data, particularly in the energy and land-use change and  forestry sectors; relevant activities including the development of  local and regional emissions factors and activity data related to  inventories; difficulties encountered in the use of the 1996  Revised IPCC Guidelines; and difficulties encountered in the use  of the section of the guidelines contained in the annex to  decision 10/CP.2, which relate to inventories.

On institutional and funding issues that influence the preparation  and reporting of GHG inventories, including data collection and  development of emissions factors, Parties recommended to, inter  alia:provide appropriate funding in the context of the second  national communications to ensure the continuity and  sustainability of the inventories; develop and strengthen institutional capacity of coordinating  agencies of research activities, encouraging the use of regional  expertise and the training of those experts; facilitate collaboration and coordination among national  institutions; create regional networks to share inventory information among  experts and institutions; develop processes to facilitate information exchange; provide financial and technical support for the creation,  development and maintenance of national web sites within the  framework of multilateral and bilateral assistance; develop an appropriate institutional framework for the  collection, updating and management of data; provide adequate funding for enabling activities for the  collection of activity data and the development of local emissions  factors; and support the development of regional projects.

On technical issues for improvement of data collection and  development of local and regional emission factors and activity  data, Parties recommended encouraging the use of activity data  from regional organizations if available and/or appropriate and  supporting the creation and development of a database on emissions  factors by the IPCC.

On difficulties encountered in the use of the 1996 Revised IPCC  Guidelines, Parties approved recommendations to: urge the IPCC in  the future guideline revision to better reflect specific  conditions and circumstances of non-Annex I parties, in particular  in the land-use change and forestry, energy and agriculture and  waste sectors; call upon the IPCC in the future guideline revision  to take better account of the relevant literature in languages  other than English and appropriate literature; translate the IPCC  good practice guidelines into the six UN languages; and provide  appropriate training for experts.

On difficulties encountered in the use of the section of the  guidelines contained in the annex to decision 10/CP.2, which  relates to the UNFCCC guidelines and their possible improvements,  Parties approved recommendations to, inter alia:request the application of the Revised 1996 IPCC guidelines  in the elaboration and reporting of the national greenhouse gas  inventories; encourage the use, as appropriate and to the extent possible,  of the IPCC good practice guidelines in greenhouse gas  inventories; replace Table II of the UNFCCC guidelines with the IPCC  summary Table 7A as the basis for summary reporting of greenhouse  gas emissions and removals; encourage the provision of worksheets of the IPCC reporting  format as an appendix to the greenhouse gas inventories; and encourage the reporting of HFC emissions to the extent  possible.

### ADAPTATION AND VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT WORKING GROUP

The V&A  assessment working group was chaired by Isabelle Niang-Diop. The  working group considered: analytical, methodological and technical  issues in the preparation and reporting of V&A assessments,  including best practices and lessons learned; difficulties in the  use of the IPCC methodologies and other models; and difficulties  encountered in the use of the UNFCCC guidelines. The group was  guided by the issues highlighted in the presentation on V&A  assessment made by Chair Niang-Diop. Methodological issues  included:the development and/or adaptation of current methodologies  appropriate for the national context; improvement of access and availability of models; continued data collection and monitoring programmes; a regional approach for transboundary issues; improvement of the first V&A studies; research development in the field of adaptation; the question of vulnerability indicators; participation in training and exchange workshops; and better representation of national experts in IPCC.

Other issues included:enhancement of human resources with more focused training  tools; enhancement of institutional capacities, including database  management; use of a decentralized approach, as appropriate; training on GEF procedures; involvement of universities and research centers; raising policy makers' awareness on climate change issues; developing public awareness; involving stakeholders in the process; addressing financial and technical support needs; and development of regional centers of excellence on climate  change.

V&A assessments are not currently required to be part of the  national communications.

Chair Niang-Diop suggested for consideration the methodological  constraints that had been raised in the regional workshops. These  included: availability of technical materials in all six UN  languages; problems with distinguishing between climate change and  climate variability; lack of availability of regional climate  change scenarios; underestimation of extreme events; lack of  models for assessing some sectors; and lack of appropriate  software, tools, data and methodologies for integrated and  socioeconomic assessment.

On models, JAMAICA and BARBADOS stressed the need for higher  resolution general circulation models while AUSTRALIA, with CUBA,  cautioned against this, stressing that higher resolution models  still only use the same data that the current models use.  AUSTRALIA noted that until the input data exists, higher  resolution models will not provide better results than the current  models. CUBA stressed that other problems exist with the current  models that will not be eliminated by a smaller scale. With  MALAYSIA, he endorsed the use of a regional approach for  identifying scenarios from the models. PANAMA said lack of  capacity to run the models is also a consideration. MALAWI  supported aiming for better input data for the models. On the  question of whether to make V&A assessment a mandatory part of the  national communications, BARBADOS noted the high costs of such  studies. EL SALVADOR, with the NETHERLANDS, noted the importance  of V&A studies for indicating to Annex I Parties the degree of  financial and technical assistance that might be needed. BOLIVIA,  ETHIOPIA, GHANA and GRENADA supported carrying out V&A  assessments.

EL SALVADOR suggested also considering the assessment of existing  adaptive capacity to current climate, particularly to climate  variability and extreme events, within current policy. CUBA  suggested that the recommendations should recognize the importance  of adaptation to climate variability. On the continuous process  for data collection, participants highlighted the need to  strengthen and facilitate the creation of climate research centers  on a national and regional level, establish South-South  cooperation, strengthen, improve and develop cooperative research  programmes, and establish agreements between climate change focal  points, national universities and researchers. On a regional  approach, participants agreed that this could be useful, as long  as they are country-driven. On integrated assessments, the  discussion addressed the lack of methodology, funds and compatible  data for such studies. Participants then discussed the need for  improved mechanisms for collecting data. On vulnerability  indicators, ECUADOR, supported by several other Parties, expressed  his concern about using the indicators to compare between Parties.  PANAMA suggested that vulnerability indicators could be useful for  prioritizing funding and effort within a country. Participants  agreed that the use of vulnerability indicators should not be  recommended for inclusion in the guidelines. Parties expressed  concern about the low representation of non-Annex I Parties in the  IPCC process.

On Thursday, 22 March, the draft recommendations were presented to  the working group participants. The recommendations were, inter  alia:inclusion of a separate chapter devoted to V&A within non- Annex I national communications; development of a common reporting format for reporting on  V&A; development of capacity to access, analyze and manipulate  data for the purposes of V&A assessment needs; establishing and/or strengthening institutional structures,  such as national climate change focal points and centers of  excellence; provision of training on model use; provision of funding to assistance programmes, such as the  NCSP; translation of documents into languages other than English;  and additional guidance to the GEF relating to the three stages  of adaptation defined for the purposes of funding adaptation  projects.

### GREENHOUSE GAS ABATEMENT WORKING GROUP

This working group was  chaired by Vute Wangwacharakul. The working group aimed to  identify analytical, methodological and technical issues in the  preparation and reporting of abatement options, including: best  practices and lessons learned; relevant issues related to  mitigation actions in the context of sustainable development; and  analytical and methodological issues related to the analysis of  abatement options, as well as the difficulties encountered in the  use of the UNFCCC guidelines.

Participants discussed the issues identified in the regional  reports relating to abatement options. They highlighted that:reporting on abatement in non-Annex I national communications  was voluntary; there had only been a limited exchange of information and  experience regarding the assessment of abatement options; the energy sector was the most widely reported sector; reporting of methodology was limited; assessment of mitigation options is an on-going process; detailed abatement options had been reported for the energy,  agriculture, transport and waste sectors; limitations were apparently associated with the  implementation of measures to mitigate emissions; and public awareness, legislation and incentives had been  suggested to encourage the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.

Problems identified were: lack of sufficient data; lack of skilled  personnel; lack of access to models; difficulties with assessment  of options; and limited access to appropriate technologies. It was  also noted that the UNFCCC guidelines do not provide guidance for  the assessment of abatement options in any of the following areas:  emission reduction estimation; construction of scenarios;  incorporation of options into national planning processes; or the  development of integrated strategies.

This working group's recommendations, which were submitted to the  Plenary on Thursday, 22 March, endorsed the inclusion of abatement  guidance for Parties who may wish to include abatement in their  national communications; stressed the provision of financial and  technical support for data acquisition and management; and  encouraged capacity building and technology assessment. Under  methodologies, the working group endorsed the assessment of  options, construction of scenarios, data management, interaction  between abatement and mitigation, use of appropriate tools, and  evaluation of social, economic and environmental options. For  reporting, the group noted: the guidelines should be able to  accommodate different timescales; the need for clear definitions  and/or terminology; and that the assumptions used in making  projections should be reported. On financial and technical  support, the group recommended: the establishment of a clearing- house; the continuation of the NCSP; mechanisms to improve  coordination among donors; assistance with preparation of project  proposals; access to appropriate technologies; and further  guidance to the financial mechanism to encourage funding of the  outlined activities.

### CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES WORKING GROUP

The working group on cross- cutting issues was chaired Julia Martinez (Mexico). She explained  that the group would discuss cross-cutting issues, including:  education, training and public awareness; information and  networking; and financial and technical assistance for the  preparation of national communications. This group submitted to  the Plenary recommendations on issues including: education,  training and public awareness, and specific recommendations that  require financial and technical assistance; support programmes;  and guidelines on national circumstances and education.

On education, training and public awareness, the working group:recommended that the UNFCCC Secretariat develop, maintain and  periodically update a clearing-house mechanism; encouraged Parties to support this effort by actively  providing materials in non-UN languages; further encouraged Parties to support by assisting in the  translation of important materials into the official languages of  the UN, including important technical documents; and suggested that technical material make maximum use of  graphics to facilitate understanding by non-technical individuals.

The group also made specific recommendations for education,  training and public awareness that require financial and technical  assistance, including:the establishment and/or enhancement of national and regional  centers of excellence for information exchange; the development of training materials for curricula purposes  in formal and non-formal education; the development of common methodologies and approaches for  training programmes; the development of programmes to train the media, including  preparing updated materials on awareness raising for different  purposes, with special emphasis on national and regional  implications; and the development and maintenance by the UNFCCC Secretariat of  a clearing-house mechanism on education, training and public  awareness materials.

On support programmes, the working group recommended:  the  provision of financial and technical support for the 90 non-Annex  I Parties not yet having submitted their initial national  communications; the continuation of activities provided by the  national communications support programmes; and further analysis  of support programmes.

On guidelines on national circumstances, the group recommended  that Parties provide a description of their national and regional  development priorities, objectives and circumstances, and how  these circumstances constitute the basis on which they address  climate change and its adverse impacts. Parties suggested that the  description of these circumstances could use headings such as  government structure, population profile, geographic profile,  climate profile, economic profile, energy, transportation,  industry, mining, tourism, waste, agriculture and fisheries,  forests, health, environment, and education and research  institutions.

On guidelines for education, the working group recommended that  the national communication may present information on aspects  including:existing programmes for promoting education, training and  public awareness on climate change; plans for developing such programmes, including climate  change issues in the curricula of different levels of the  educational system; the focus and magnitude of training programmes; the focus and scope of public awareness programmes; the existence and expertise of resource or information  centers; the nature and extent of public participation in climate  change related processes; and the needs for financial and technical support.

## CLOSING PLENARY

On Thursday afternoon, 22 March, participants met in the closing  Plenary. CGE Chair Ajavon opened the meeting and requested each  working group to present the recommendations it had identified  during the course of the workshop. The recommendations will be  forwarded to the CGE for its consideration and review. The  recommendations will then be returned to the Parties for comments,  and finally will be presented to the SBI for submission to the COP  for its consideration.

Each of the working groups then presented its recommendations:  Chair Ajavon, on behalf of the group on greenhouse gas  inventories; the rapporteur, Mahendra Kumar, for the working group  on V&A assessment; Lauraine Lotter, rapporteur for the working  group on greenhouse gas abatement issues; and Philip Weech,  rapporteur for the group on cross-cutting issues.

On cross-cutting issues, SENEGAL suggested including educational  centers in the clearing-house mechanism. Parties agreed with  GERMANY that the workshop should take into account the input of  the working group on support programmes and technical and  financial needs and recommend further consideration and  elaboration of these needs by the CGE members, who should also  take into account input from other working groups, other regional  workshops and the deliberations during the Plenary. SENEGAL  suggested avoiding adding tasks to the CGE and deleting text that  is not agreed. She stressed the need to know why many countries  did not submit their initial national communications before  recommending the need for financial support. EL SALVADOR suggested  specifying in the recommendation the types of actions that should  be taken by support programmes. Chair Ajavon responded that the  corresponding subsidiary bodies of the UNFCCC would decide on the  actions.

Parties then discussed several issues on national circumstances.  EGYPT suggested reporting the information on national  circumstances in a way that enables the coordination of technical  assistance. ETHIOPIA suggested adding reference to land use and  land cover among national circumstances. GERMANY said the  description of national circumstances should be linked across  other sections of the report, in particular to inventories.

Parties asked whether the comments made by the participants were  to be considered by the CGE in its preparation of the final  document. Participants also debated whether the recommendations  could be adopted at the workshop without careful consideration and  deliberation of each one, and discussed the role of the CGE in  making further adjustments to the recommendations. The Secretariat  explained that the recommendations would be forwarded to the CGE,  which would consider the comments made during the final Plenary,  and return the revised recommendations to participants for  comments before the document is forwarded to the SBI.

With the understanding that the process had not yet been  completed, the recommendations were then adopted by the Plenary.  Chair Ajavon read out the final statement of the workshop, which,  on behalf of the experts: recognized the important contribution to  the work of the CGE; thanked the Governments of Panama, Mexico,  Kenya and Thailand for hosting the workshops; thanked the  governments of the US, Germany, Australia, Switzerland and Finland  for providing funds for the organization of the workshop and  meetings of the CGE; appreciated the assistance and guidance  provided by the members of the CGE and the UNFCCC Secretariat; and  urged the CGE members to take the recommendations of the workshop  into consideration in fulfilling the tasks of the CGE, in  accordance with its mandates contained in decision 8/CP.5.

Chair Ajavon thanked the participants and wished them safe  journeys home. Martha Perdomo (UNFCCC Secretariat) thanked the  participants, support staff, interpreters, and the government of  Panama for their support. Emilio Sempris, on behalf of the  Administrator of ANAM, underscored the importance of the meeting  and expressed his gratitude to the participants. He closed the  meeting at 8:00 pm.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR BEFORE THE RESUMED COP-6

### APEC 21ST CENTURY RENEWABLE ENERGY DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVE PRIVATE  SECTOR FORUM

This meeting will take place on 26-27 March 2001, in  Portland, Oregon, USA. For more information, contact: the  Organizing Committee and APEC Sustainable Development Network,  Portland, Oregon, tel: +1-503-279-9565; fax: +1-503-279-9381;  Internet: http://www.apecnetwork.org/

### INTERNATIONAL WORKSHOP ON CARBON ACCOUNTING, EMISSIONS TRADING AND  COP-6 NEGOTIATIONS RELATED TO BIOENERGY, WOOD PRODUCTS AND CARBON  SEQUESTRATION

This workshop will convene in Canberra, Australia,  from 26-30 March 2001. For more information, contact: Kimberly  Robertson; tel: +43-316-876-1330; fax: +43-316-876-91130; e-mail:  kimberly.robertson@joanneum.ac.at; Internet:  http://www.joanneum.ac.at/iea-bioenergy-task25/announcement.doc

### SIXTH INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON SOLAR ENERGY AND APPLIED  PHOTOCHEMISTRY

This meeting will be held from 3-8 April 2001, in  Cairo, Egypt. For more information contact: Sabry Abdel-Mottaleb,  Faculty of Science, Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt; e-mail:  solar@photoenergy.org; Internet:  http://www.photoenergy.org/solar2001.html

### IPCC MEETINGS ON THE THIRD ASSESSMENT REPORT (TAR)

The  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) approved the  reports of Working Group I (on climate change science) in January  2001, Working Group II (impacts and adaptation) in February 2001  and Working Group III (climate change mitigation) in March 2001.  The IPCC Plenary will meet in Nairobi from 4-6 April 2001, to  approve all three reports. For more information, contact: IPCC  Secretariat, +41-22-730-8208; fax : +41-22-730-8025; e-mail:  ipcc_sec@gateway.wmo.ch; Internet: http://www.ipcc.ch

### 12TH GLOBAL WARMING INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE & EXPO - KYOTO  COMPLIANCE REVIEW

This meeting will be held in Cambridge, UK,  from 8-11 April 2001. For more information, contact: Sinyan Shen,  The Global Warming International Center Headquarters, USA; tel:  +1-630-910-1551; Internet:  http://www2.msstate.edu/~krreddy/glowar/gw12c.html

### CONFERENCE ON EQUITY AND GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE

This international  conference will take place from 17-18 April 2001, in Washington,  DC. It is being organized by the Pew Center on Global Climate  Change. The meeting will consider 'fair and reasonable' actions  for all countries in addressing climate change, as well as how  issues of competitiveness, economic growth and ethics relate to  this debate. For more information, contact: Christie Jorge  Santelises; tel: +1-703-516-4146; fax: +1-703- 841-1422; e-mail:  jorgec@pewclimate.org; Internet: http://pewclimate.org/events

### REGIONAL SEMINAR ON ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE VARIABILITY IN  THE INSULAR CARIBBEAN

This workshop will take place from 7-9 May  2001, in Havana, Cuba. It is hosted by the Government of Cuba and  UNDP. For more information, contact: Jafet Enríquez, tel: +537 24- 1512 /15; fax: +537-24-1516; e-mail: jafet.enriquez@undp.org;  Internet: http://www.onu.org.cu

### SECOND INTERNATIONAL COMBINED HEAT AND POWER SYMPOSIUM

This  meeting will take place from 9-10 May 2001, in Amsterdam. For more  information, contact: Quirine Boellaard, tel: +31-20-549-1212; e- mail: q.heerkens@rai.nl; Internet: http://www.2ndCHPsymposium.com

### KYOTO MECHANISMS

EMERGING BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES: This forum,  which will convene from 10-11 May 2001, in Hong Kong, examines the  business opportunities and risks as countries work towards a final  agreement under the UNFCCC Conference of the Parties. Several  companies will outline emissions trading market structures and  provide insights on global corporate initiatives in promoting  emissions trading. Government officials from India and China will  discuss investment opportunities available under the Kyoto  mechanisms. Case studies on Malaysian and Indonesian CDM projects  will examine legal, auditing and finance issues. For more  information, contact: Centre for Management Technology, Christina  Lu Jialing; tel: +65-346-9132; e-mail:  christina@cmtsp.com.sg;  Internet: http://www.cmtevents.com/kyoto.htm

### INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON CLIMATE CHANGE AND VARIABILITY IN  NORTHERN EUROPE

This meeting will be held in Turku, Finland, from  6-8 June 2001. For more information, contact: Mia Rönkä,  University of Turku, Finland; tel: +358-2-333-6009; fax: +358-2- 333-5730; Internet: http://figare.utu.fi/notice.html

### RESUMED COP-6/14TH SESSIONS OF THE UNFCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES

The  resumed COP-6 (as outlined under COP-6 decision FCCC/CP/2000/L.3)  of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change will be held from  16-27 July 2001, in Bonn. For more information, contact: the  UNFCCC Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999;  e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.int; Internet: http://www.unfccc.int