---
title: "TWELFTH SESSIONS OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES OF THE FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE, 5-16 JUNE 2000"
id: enb12127e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12127e
date: 2000-06-16
abstract: "The twelfth sessions of the subsidiary bodies (SB-12) of  the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  (FCCC) will take place from 12-16 June 2000 in Bonn,  Germany, preceded by one week of informal meetings  scheduled for 5-10 June. Delegates to SB-12 and the  informal meetings will work toward fulfilling the Buenos  Aires Plan of Action (BAPA) adopted at the Fourth  Conference of the Parties (COP-4) in November 1998. Under  the BAPA, Parties set a two-year deadline for strengthening  FCCC implementation and preparing for the future entry into  force of the Kyoto Protocol. The Sixth Conference of the  Parties (COP-6), scheduled to take place from 13-24  November 2000, in The Hague, the Netherlands, will mark the  culmination of this two-year process."
---

SB-12 will focus on a range of technical and political  issues aimed at laying the foundations for negotiations on  a comprehensive agreement to be completed at COP-6. The  Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) will consider a  number of issues, including national communications and the  financial mechanism. The Subsidiary Body for Scientific and  Technological Advice (SBSTA) will consider, inter alia:  best practices in policies and measures among Parties  included in Annex I to the FCCC; land use, land-use change  and forestry; guidelines under Protocol Articles 5  (methodological issues), 7 (communication of information)  and 8 (review of information); and the development and  transfer of technologies. SBSTA and SBI will jointly  consider the Protocol mechanisms, implementation of FCCC  Article 4.8 and 4.9 and matters relating to Article 3.14 of  the Protocol (adverse effects). The joint SBI-SBSTA working  group on compliance under the Protocol (JWG) will resume  work started during previous sessions of the subsidiary  bodies. In addition, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate  Change (IPCC) will present its recent scientific and  technical reports.

# INTERSESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS

### WORKSHOP ON COMPLIANCE UNDER THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

The  workshop on compliance under the Kyoto Protocol was held  from 1-3 March 2000 in Bonn, Germany. The workshop was  designed to assist in developing elements of procedures and  mechanisms relating to a compliance system for in-depth  consideration at forthcoming meetings of the JWG. It was  organized by the FCCC Secretariat and the Co-Chairs of the  JWG. Participants heard presentations and discussed various  issues, including: linkages between Articles 5, 7 and 8 and  the compliance system; institutional design; outcomes or  consequences of non-compliance or potential non-compliance;  general provisions; and a framework. On the basis of  discussions during the workshop, as well as their working  paper resulting from consultations held in Montreux in  February, the Co-Chairs developed a text that will help  form the basis for negotiations at SB-12. For more  information visit:  http://www.iisd.ca/climate/cop6/tech_ws/compliance/index.ht ml

### WORKSHOPS ON FCCC ARTICLE 4.8 AND 4.9

ADVERSE EFFECTS OF  CLIMATE CHANGE AND THE IMPACT OF IMPLEMENTATION OF RESPONSE  MEASURES: Two workshops on FCCC Article 4.8 and 4.9 were  held from 9-11 and 13-15 March 2000 in Bonn, Germany. They  were organized by the FCCC Secretariat and the Chairs of  the FCCC subsidiary bodies. The first workshop was held  from 9-11 March to consider initial actions to meet the  specific needs and concerns of developing country Parties  and the specific needs and special situations of the least  developed countries (LDCs) arising from the adverse effects  of climate change. Participants heard presentations and  engaged in discussions on the adverse effects of climate  change on food security, water resources, economic  activities, coastal zones and human health. They also  considered initial actions related to funding, insurance  and the transfer of technology to meet the needs and  circumstances of developing countries. Other issues  addressed included actions to: enhance capacity for  monitoring, systematic observation and vulnerability  assessment in developing countries; build capacity in  environmental management and integrated assessment; and  identify adaptation options and facilitate appropriate  adaptation.

The second workshop was held from 13-15 March to consider  the impact of the implementation of response measures to  climate change. Participants considered methodological  approaches and actions necessary under the FCCC relating to  the impact of implementation of response measures on, inter  alia, terms of trade, international capital flows and  developmental efforts, in accordance with FCCC Article 4.8  and 4.9 and in the light of matters related to Protocol  Article 3.14 (adverse effects). Participants also  considered the nature, content and sources of information  required, procedures and modalities for the provision of  information, and actions needed. The specific needs and  special situations of LDCs were also considered.

The Chairs of the FCCC subsidiary bodies produced a report  that will provide input for discussions on these issues at  SB-12 and SB-13, to be held in June and September 2000  respectively. For more information visit:  http://www.iisd.ca/climate/cop6/tech_ws/4.8&4.9/index.html

### WORKSHOP ON ISSUES RELATED TO ARTICLES 5, 7 & 8 OF THE  KYOTO PROTOCOL

The workshop on issues related to Protocol  Articles 5 (methodological issues), 7 (communication of  information) and 8 (review of information) took place from  14-16 March 2000, in Bonn, Germany. Participants met in  three working groups to consider: guidelines for national  systems under Article 5.1; issues related to adjustments  under Article 5.2 and to guidelines under Article 8; and  issues related to guidelines under Article 7. Participants  agreed upon a number of elements to be considered for  inclusion in the guidelines. They also agreed to: use the  FCCC reporting guidelines on annual inventories and  national communications and the FCCC guidelines for the  technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Annex I  Parties as a basis for the development of guidelines; and  aim for the early adoption of these guidelines in order to  facilitate preparations for the implementation of the  Protocol by Annex I Parties. For more information visit:  http://www.unfccc.int/sessions/workshop/000314/index.html

### PACIFIC ISLANDS CLIMATE CHANGE CONFERENCE

This meeting was  held from 3-7 April 2000, in Rarotonga, Cook Islands. The  meeting was organized by the South Pacific Regional  Environment Programme (SPREP) in partnership with the  National Tidal Facility, UNDP and the GEF, through the  Pacific Islands Climate Change Assistance Programme.  Participants considered a variety of climate change issues  relevant to Pacific Island States, including: current  knowledge and understanding of climate change and its  impacts; scientific aspects of climate change;  vulnerability and adaptation; capacity building;  stakeholder involvement; and country reports and  experiences. For more information visit:  http://www.sprep.org.ws/whatsnew_.htm

### WORKSHOP ON BEST PRACTICES IN POLICIES AND MEASURES

The  Workshop on Best Practices in Policies and Measures (P&Ms)  under the FCCC was held from 11-13 April 2000 in  Copenhagen, Denmark. The workshop sought to: clarify the  concept of best practices in P&Ms; identify the criteria  used by countries to select, monitor and evaluate these  practices; and enable countries to improve and enhance  their reporting on best practice P&Ms. The meeting was co- sponsored by Denmark and France and organized by the FCCC  Secretariat in cooperation with the SBSTA Chair.  Participants met in seven working groups to discuss:  national programmes; cross-cutting issues; indicators;  methodological and institutional issues; and best practices  in P&Ms to address CO2 emissions from energy supply,  industry, transport, household and commercial sectors, and  emissions of non-CO2 gases from energy, industry,  agriculture, forestry and waste. A Chair's report of the  workshop will be presented to SBSTA-12. For more  information visit:  http://www.iisd.ca/climate/cop6/tech_ws/policies/info.htm

### EFIEA CLIMATE POLICY WORKSHOP 'FROM KYOTO TO THE HAGUE -  EUROPEAN PERSPECTIVES ON MAKING THE KYOTO PROTOCOL WORK'

The Second European Forum for International Environmental  Assessment (EFIEA) Climate Workshop, 'From Kyoto to the  Hague - European Perspectives on Making the Kyoto Protocol  Work,' took place from 18-19 April 2000, at the Royal  Netherlands Academy of Sciences in Amsterdam. It was  sponsored by the Dutch National Research Programme on  Global Air Pollution and Climate Change. The workshop aimed  to bring together state-of-the-art scientific information  from European research that is relevant to the European  Union (EU) and its member States in preparing for COP-6,  and to enhance the policy relevance of climate-related  research in Europe. The workshop was divided into four  thematic sessions: Kyoto mechanisms, sinks, implementation  issues and European international climate  strategies/leadership. Regarding the mechanisms,  participants highlighted the potential benefits of the use  of the mechanisms, while noting that there are sound  reasons for domestic action. On EU leadership, it was noted  that the EU has a long-term vision and can integrate  climate change policy with other issues. A number of  participants urged the EU to work to maintain the  environmental credibility of the Protocol. On  implementation, it was noted that EU enlargement is not  relevant to implementing existing obligations under the  Protocol. For more information visit:  http://www.iisd.ca/crs/EFIEA/index.html

### CONFERENCE ON INNOVATIVE POLICY SOLUTIONS TO GLOBAL CLIMATE  CHANGE

This conference, co-hosted by the Pew Center on  Global Climate Change and the Royal Institute of  International Affairs, took place from 25-26 April 2000 in  Washington DC, USA. Participants considered innovative  policy measures being implemented by industrialized country  governments and the private sector. Conference topics  included: common policy approaches, such as taxes, trading  and negotiated agreements; cross-cutting issues, including  competitiveness and trade; energy and transport sector  policies; and state and local programmes. For more  information visit:  http://www.pewclimate.org/forms/innov_conf.html

### 16TH SESSION OF THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE  CHANGE

This meeting took place from 1-8 May 2000, in  Montreal, Canada. Participants considered the IPCC  programme and budget for 2001-2003, the report of the  previous session, and progress reports on the IPCC's Third  Assessment Report. They also approved new IPCC reports on:  Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF);  Methodological and Technological issues in Technology  Transfer; Emissions Scenarios; and Good Practice Guidance  and Uncertainty Management in National Greenhouse Gas  Inventories. For more information visit:  http://www.ipcc.ch/

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### INITIAL BRIEFING AND INFORMAL MEETINGS

An initial briefing  for participants attending this week's informal meetings  will be held at 10:00 am. It will be followed by informal  meetings in parallel sessions on: Guidelines under Protocol  Articles 5, 7 and 8; and FCCC Article 4.8 and 4.9 and  Protocol Article 3.14. These two meetings will conclude at  1:00 pm and resume from 7:00 pm - 9:00 pm. An informal  meeting on LULUCF and a session on the Protocol mechanisms  are both scheduled to begin at 1:00 pm. Consult the  announcement board for further details.