---
title: "HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE UNFCCC FOURTH CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES, 5 NOVEMBER 1998"
id: enb1291e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1291e
date: 1998-11-05
abstract: "Delegates considered preparations for the first session of the  Conference of Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to  the Protocol (COP/MOP-1) in a joint plenary session. The  Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA)  discussed research and systematic observation and other matters.  In the afternoon and evening, contact groups discussed non-Annex  I communications, technology transfer, FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9  (adverse effects on developing countries), the financial  mechanism and Articles 4.2(a) and (b) (review of commitments)."
---

# JOINT SBSTA/SBI PLENARY

The SBI and SBSTA discussed preparations for the first session  of the Conference of Parties serving as the Meeting of the  Parties to the Protocol (COP/MOP-1). The Chairs introduced their  draft decision (FCCC/CP/1998/3) and invited comment. SAUDI  ARABIA said preparations were needed for all Protocol articles,  not just the flexibility mechanisms. He stressed that Protocol  Articles 3.14 and 2.3 (minimization of adverse effects on  developing countries) had not been adequately addressed. He  suggested convening a separate contact group, discussing the  issues in the contact group on FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9 or in  the one on flexibility mechanisms. VENEZUELA, BANGLADESH, UNITED  ARAB EMIRATES, IRAN, SYRIA, KUWAIT, LEBANON, NIGERIA, GAMBIA,  ECUADOR, ALGERIA, MOROCCO and INDONESIA supported SAUDI ARABIA.

SWITZERLAND supported the draft decision but suggested possible  amendments to the timeframe and scope of work. The US proposed  amending the decision to reflect the differing legal status of  the Convention and the Protocol. The EU, supported by MONACO,  noted the need to specify ways to facilitate cooperation and  stressed coordination of IPCC and FCCC activities through a  joint working group. He proposed establishing a compliance  mechanism and scheduling a meeting for early 1999. JAPAN noted  the need for time for consultation and difficulties in combining  ongoing work under the FCCC and the Protocol. He opposed  deadlines for setting compliance procedures until the mechanisms  were elaborated. CANADA called for a balance between the  Convention and the Protocol and said Protocol issues need  attention so that Parties will ratify it.

The Chair said Protocol Articles 2.3 and 3.14 were within the  scope of the contact group's work and the group would determine  its own agenda. KUWAIT, NIGERIA and SAUDI ARABIA sought a clear  mandate for the contact group to consider Articles 2.3 and 3.14.  The US, JAPAN and AUSTRALIA said decision 3/CP.3, which  specified the mandate of the contact group, did not require  specific consideration of Protocol Articles 2.3 and 3.14. The EU  said the issue merited discussion but it was unnecessary to  highlight specific articles.

The Chair said no separate contact groups would be established.  SAUDI ARABIA called for a work plan and timeline on Article 3.14  for COP/MOP 1, and said that progress on Article 3.14 should  follow an approach similar to Protocol Articles 6, 12 and 17  (flexibility mechanisms). The Chair indicated that no work plan  or timetable for any of the articles in question would be  developed, but these items will be explored because they are  linked. Espen Rønneberg (Marshall Islands) will consult on  preparatory issues to COP/MOP-1.

The discussion on research and systematic observation was  continued from the previous day (FCCC/CP/1998/7 and  FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.2). Parties indicated the value of the GCOS  Report and the significance of its work. As a result, Parties  called for expansion of research and systematic observation,  many highlighting the need to focus research and systematic  observation systems on developing countries and issues that were  relevant to them to combat the deterioration of these systems.  MAURITIUS, TANZANIA and SAUDI ARABIA called on the subsidiary  bodies to instruct the GEF to provide funding for research and  systematic observations in developing countries.

Chair Chow explained that the methodological issues relating to  Annex I national communications will be discussed at an expert  workshop to be held in December by the Secretariat  (FCCC/SBSTA/1998/7, FCCC/SBSTA/1998/8 FCCC/SBSTA/1998/Misc.6 and  ADD.1). The Secretariat provided a background to these issues,  explained work conducted and previous meetings held, and  described the plan for development of appropriate guidelines.  The conclusions of the workshop will be discussed in SBSTA-10.  John Christensen (UNEP) provided a background to an  international collaborative report on methodological issues. The  US called for the resolution of issues and expected to use them  to develop guidelines and national measurement systems that  could be ratified by COP-6. The US proposed that the December  workshop consider methodological, reporting, review and  assessment issues. NORWAY sought continual re-evaluation of  inventory data including base years as methodologies improve.  Chairman Chow proposed that he prepare a draft decision for  consideration by SBSTA.

With SWITZERLAND, the EU recognized that there is a link between  the Montreal and Kyoto Protocols. He requested the subsidiary  bodies to provide a list of available technologies to limit and  reduce emissions of HFCs and PFCs. The US, with AUSTRALIA, said  there should be coordination between international environmental  agreements, but the process required careful consideration given  the possible implication on industry. He proposed that SBSTA  consider the impact of the phase out of substances covered under  the Montreal Protocol and asked that they consult with that  body. Chairman Chow proposed that he hold consultations on this  matter.

# CONTACT GROUPS

The contact group on the implementation of Article 4(8) and (9)  (adverse effects on developing countries), chaired by Bo Kjellen  (Sweden) and Mohammad Reza Salamat (Iran) met to discuss a non- paper prepared by the Chairs. The G-77/CHINA suggested  requesting the Annex I Parties to include information on  possible impacts in their national communications. Discussion  revolved around inter alia: the need for information on the  adverse effects of climate change and the impacts of response  measures; the nature of information needed; the party  responsible for providing the information; and the right forum  to present the information. SAUDI ARABIA, LIBYA and other  developing countries stressed that information be provided by  Parties that had capacity and resources. The US, with JAPAN,  CANADA and others, objected to the proposal, as it was  impractical if not impossible to assess impacts outside their  borders. The Chairs took the views of Parties under advisement.

The contact group on the financial mechanism, chaired by John  Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda) and Dan Reifsnyder (US), met briefly.  The contact group focused on procedural matters that would  enable a decision to be reached. The G-77/CHINA, after  considering comments to their initial proposal presented in the  previous meeting, outlined two new proposals on the substantive  issues, namely: the status of and guidance to the Global  Environmental Facility. These documents will be considered in a  series of contact group meetings over the next few days.

As of 9:00 pm, the contact group considering the review of  Convention Article 4.2 (a) and (b), chaired by Jennifer Irish  (Canada) and Margaret Mukahanana (Zimbabwe), was still meeting.  The negotiations remained focused on establishing the approach  to preparing a draft statement which, according to Article 4.2  (d) of the Convention, needs to be reached by 31 December 1998.  Developing country Parties insisted that a draft decision  provided by the G-77/CHINA provide the basis for the group's  deliberation. Other countries stated that a document, which  compiled a range of submissions to the Secretariat following the  June subsidiary body meetings, should serve as the core text for  discussions.

The Contact group on technology discussed technology transfer  issues and a draft decision for the COP. Three draft decisions  proposed by the US, G-77/China and the EU  (FCCC/CP/1998/MISC.5/Add.3) were circulated. The US said  communications between Parties were hindered by the differing  conceptual understandings of the issues. He said that technology  transfer should be based on country specific needs and proposed  that reference be made to successful programmes. He supported  the Secretariat's proposal for a consultative process that would  facilitate dialogue between Parties. The G-77/China proposal  focused on identifying means of linking the issues and providing  an interface between the providers of technology and the  recipients. It proposed a technology transfer mechanism (TTM)  'to assist developing country Parties to obtain their needed  environmentally sound technologies and know-how conducive to  addressing climate change on non-commercial and preferential  terms and thus contribute to the ultimate objective of the  convention.' There was consensus on the capacity building  section of the G-77/China proposal, which called for efforts to  enhance endogenous capacities and provide enabling environments.

The US opposed the reference to 'non-commercial, preferential  terms' citing its rejection when the Convention was being  negotiated in favor of the market which was understood as the  best way to proceed. SIERRA LEONE said the failure of the market  approach to technology transfer was the reason to deliberate on  how to proceed. The EU supported AUSTRALIA in proposing a  clearinghouse mechanism similar to the one under the Convention  on Biodiversity. He opposed the creation of a new financial  mechanism. The delegates debated, inter alia: the necessity,  possible form and functions of the TTM; issues relating to the  transfer of public domain technology; the features of a  consultative process; and the role of dialogue between Parties.

The Chair noted the emerging consensus on: the need for  progress; the terms outlined in the capacity building section of  the G-77/China proposal; and the need for dialogue consultations  and information exchange. She noted that there was a convergence  between aspects of the Parties' positions, although an agreement  on terminology was needed. She said there was disagreement on  whether to have a 'mechanism/process/system/facility,' its forms  and functions, and the elements for immediate action. She called  upon the delegates to consider the issues and resume discussions  on 6 November.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

Official negotiations at COP-4 have mellowed considerably since  Monday's confrontational but cathartic exchanges. Some observers  suggest, however, that politically sensitive talks are underway  behind the scenes. One delegate noted that technology transfer  threatens to become a linchpin issue for these meetings. He  expressed concern that some developed countries have  underestimated the degree of significance the G-77/China places  on the issue, perhaps to the point of halting negotiations  unless the COP takes a decision. Some observers suggested that  the consultations by the host Party have been initiated and may  continue over the weekend.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### CONTACT GROUPS

Contact groups will be held in the morning.  Consult the daily programme for room and time.

### JOINT SBI/SBSTA PLENARY

The joint plenary will meet at 1:00 pm  in Plenary I.