---
title: "HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE MEETINGS OF THE FCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES, TUESDAY, 8 JUNE 1999"
id: enb12107e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12107e
date: 1999-06-08
abstract: "The morning meeting of the joint contact group on the Protocol  mechanisms was interrupted by a second bomb threat to the  Maritim Hotel. The contact group reconvened later in the morning  and afternoon. The Subsidiary Body for Scientific and  Technological Advice (SBSTA) met in the afternoon to consider  draft conclusions on research and systematic observation and the  work programme on methodological issues. The Joint Working Group  (JWG) on compliance met in the afternoon to consider a Co- Chair's draft work programme. Contact groups were convened on  non-Annex I communications and land use, land-use change and  forestry (LULUCF)."
---

# SBSTA

On the draft conclusions on research and systematic observation  (FCCC/SBSTA/1999/L.2), the EU requested deleting the paragraph  on SBSTA's invitation to GEF to include, in its report to the  COP, the specific steps it has taken to implement the provisions  of paragraph 1(c) of decision 2/CP.4 (guidance to the operating  entity of the financial mechanism), stating that it was  addressed elsewhere. CHINA, supported by the CENTRAL AFRICAN  REPUBLIC, said important decisions sometimes have to be  reiterated until they are implemented. The US stated that, if  included, the paragraph should reflect the whole decision and  not just a part of it. The EU proposed requesting GEF to report  to the COP on its funding for developing countries to build  capacity for participation in systematic observation networks.  Delegates adopted the draft conclusions as amended.

Regarding the draft conclusions on the work programme on  methodological issues related to Protocol Articles 5  (methodologies), 7 (communication), and 8 (review of  information) (FCCC/SBSTA/1999/L.3), the EU requested changing  the date of submission from 15 August to 15 September to allow  time for preparation.  Chair Chow said the current deadline  meant Parties could receive the compiled views prior to COP-5.  Delegates adopted the draft conclusions without any amendments.

# JOINT WORKING GROUP ON COMPLIANCE

The co-chairs proposed a draft work programme on procedures and  mechanisms relating to compliance under the Protocol  (FCCC/SB/1999/CRP.2). Under the proposal, the Joint Working  Group (JWG) invites Parties to make submissions to the  Secretariat by 15 August 1999 in response to questions contained  in an annex to the proposal. These submissions will be compiled  in a miscellaneous document. The JWG also requests the co-chairs  to produce, for consideration by JWG-2, a synthesis of proposals  by Parties that would update the non-paper prepared by the  Secretariat for this session. The JWG also agrees that an  informal discussion on work under the SBI/SBSTA and experience  under other conventions would help Parties better understand the  compliance system needed. The JWG co-chairs will organize the  discussion.

On a deadline for Parties to respond to a questionnaire on  compliance, Co-Chair Dovland (Norway) noted that the 15 August  1999 deadline was intended to allow Parties as much time as  possible but would render translation of documents in time for  COP-5 impossible. He indicated that an earlier deadline would  not only facilitate translation, but also revisions of the  synthesis of submissions by Parties to update the current  version. After an extended discussion, 1 August 1999 was agreed  as the deadline. SWITZERLAND proposed including a reference to  Decision 8/CP.4 (Preparations for the COP serving as the MOP) so  that Parties prepare their submissions bearing it in mind and  asked whether the co-chairs intended to prepare a more 'legally  oriented' text based on the synthesis. The US amended the  proposal so that Parties address additional Decision 8/CP.4  issues to the extent that they are not otherwise covered by  their submissions.

On the nature and timing of the proposed informal exchange of  information, the G-77/CHINA, supported by SAUDI ARABIA and IRAN,  preferred holding it after COP-5, but before the twelfth  sessions of the subsidiary bodies (SB-12). She said the  discussion should have clearly defined objectives and should not  reach conclusions or form the basis for any documents.  Participants should be primarily government experts. SWITZERLAND  suggested the co-chairs develop terms of reference for the  informal discussions. AOSIS suggested holding the discussions  back-to-back with COP-5. The EU, CANADA, the US and AUSTRALIA  supported holding it prior to COP-5 in order to better prepare  for and participate more fully in that meeting. AUSTRALIA noted  that the Protocol is breaking new ground in international law  and recommended examining other compliance models. CANADA said  the discussions would allow more effective use of scarce time  and resources and, with the EU, said it would provide an  opportunity for 'mutual learning.' The US stressed that  compliance is an urgent matter and must be completed by COP-6.  Co-Chair Dovland proposed further consultations. The JWG will  re-consider the issue on Thursday.

# CONTACT GROUPS

### Joint Contact Group on Mechanisms

The G-77/CHINA introduced its  position paper on the clean development mechanism (CDM),  highlighting the CDM's role in assisting developing countries in  achieving sustainable development and developed countries in  complying with their QELROs. He stressed the need to decide on  principles before addressing methodological issues and suggested  creating an adaptation fund.

The group covered various elements of the Secretariat's  synthesis paper, identifying areas of convergence and divergence  and exchanging views. On objectives, principles and purposes,  the EU identified convergence on various areas, including cost  effectiveness, transparency and equity and divergence on issues,  such as inter-tradeability. The G-77/CHINA recommended that its  paper be the basis for future negotiations. CHINA identified  issues missing from the Secretariat's synthesis report but  covered in the G-77/China paper, including transparency and  climate change effectiveness. He said discussions should focus  on the clusters--principles, methodologies and institutional  issues--recommended in the Buenos Aires Plan of Action. The US  identified the areas of convergence as being those that  recognize, inter alia, private sector participation in the CDM  and the need for baselines to precede use of the mechanisms.  PERU recommended a common baseline for joint implementation and  the CDM. She said such an approach would, inter alia: provide a  simple, transparent and reliable methodology for common baseline  application, as the regional average of Annex II in energy and  other sectors would constitute the calculation basis; and ensure  environmental integrity in emissions reductions.

Regarding legal entities, the EU identified convergence on the  involvement of other entities and added that Parties should be  responsible for them.  She said the COP/MOP should designate  operational entities.  NORWAY, supported by CANADA, said  operational entities were a key element for CDM institutional  structure. He added that they should be drawn from the private  sector, independent, centralized and accredited by the Executive  Board. On project eligibility, the US stressed the need for a  comprehensive approach to certification and verification,  including options for baselines. The G-77/CHINA said project  eligibility is central to the principle, nature and scope of the  CDM. NORWAY noted that there was no section on baselines in the  synthesis report. KOREA said project eligibility and baselines  are essential in formulating CDM rules. He said eligible  projects should demonstrate greenhouse gas reduction and  investment, financial and technology additionality. On the  eligibility of sink projects, the EU preferred their exclusion  pending a decision by the COP.

Regarding the contribution to sustainable development, the G-77/CHINA said the recipient country should be the sole judge of  whether a project meets its sustainable development priorities.  NORWAY proposed that this be determined under project  registration. The EU suggested that non-Annex I Parties confirm  in writing how a project would help it achieve sustainable  development and stressed that the project activity should be  consistent with all international agreements to which the  Parties involved belong. CHINA suggested applying a similar  condition to the funding country to confirm how a CDM would  result in certified emissions reductions (CERs).

On sequestration, CANADA, supported by NORWAY and IRAN, proposed  addressing this under project eligibility. The G-77/CHINA said  discussions on sequestration should be avoided until ongoing  studies by SBSTA and IPCC are concluded. The EU reiterated its  preference to exclude sequestration pending a COP decision.

On technology transfer, the US identified convergence on the  CDM's role in facilitating technology transfer. On technology  transfer and project financing, the G-77/CHINA highlighted the  dimension of additionality, a feature absent in the Chair's  draft. He said funding for CDM projects should be additional to  GEF, ODA and other developed country financial commitments.

On supplementarity, the G-77/CHINA highlighted the primacy of  domestic action and recommended the development of guidelines on  supplementarity. The EU stressed the importance of the issue and  the primacy of domestic action, and proposed a concrete ceiling.  The US noted possible divergence on this issue. On levies, the  G-77/CHINA highlighted establishing an adaptation fund. The US  questioned how this fund would be managed and its proceeds  dispersed. On CERs, the G-77/CHINA suggested discussing them  bearing in mind the purposes of the CDM.

### LULUCF

The LULUCF contact group met in the morning to consider  draft conclusions that contained a compilation of additional  proposals by Parties based on ideas emerging from the group's  earlier discussions. Participants accepted wording suggested by  the US and amended by the EU and the G-77/China for a paragraph  inviting the IPCC, in conjunction with SBSTA-11, to provide an  in-depth progress report and a special side event on the draft  IPCC Special Report on LULUCF. Members of the group reconvened  in the afternoon for informal consultations and negotiated text  that cleared most of the remaining brackets. The full contact  group at its next meeting will consider their recommendations.

Non-Annex I Communications: The non-Annex I communications  contact group met in an evening session and discussed proposals  submitted by the EU and the G-77/China for the draft decision.  Participants discussed key issues in the two documents that  could be included in the decision, such as the G-77/China's  suggestion of a non-Annex I expert group and the EU's proposal  for technical assessments. A number of delegates expressed  concern at the differences between the two texts and the  potential difficulties in finding common ground between them.  The group decided to reconvene to consider how to proceed.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

'Delays, delays, delays' was how several observers summarized  the meeting thus far. Some suggested that the deceptively  distant deadlines for decisions are feeding the temptation to  leave substantive discussions to the last minute. A number said  a sense of lethargy was inevitable following the heady days of  Kyoto, while others cited increasingly poor prospects for  ratification by the US as a cause of hesitation. An EU delegate  remarked that the participants should 'get the environment and  emotion back into the debate because it is getting very  depressing.' With the meeting entering its final days, some  predicted that progress at COP-5 will be patchy at best, with  the modest advances likely on guidelines for Annex I national  communications offset by the snail's pace of talks on LULUCF and  mechanisms. Other delays took on a more ominous tone, as  evidenced by a bomb threat to the Secretariat headquarters and a  second bomb threat to the Maritim.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

## Joint contact group on mechanisms

This group will meet at 3:00  pm in the Maritim.

Contact group on the budget: This group will meet at 4:00 pm in  a room TBA.

Consult the meeting board for other meetings.