---
title: "SB 24 & AWG HIGHLIGHTS"
id: enb12297e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12297e
date: 
abstract: "The first workshop of the UN Framework Convention on Climate  Change (UNFCCC) 'Dialogue on long-term cooperative action to  address climate change by enhancing implementation of the  Convention' was held in Bonn, Germany, from 15-16 May 2006. The  event took place prior to the twenty-fourth sessions of the  Subsidiary Bodies (SB 24) of the UNFCCC (18-26 May) and the first  session of the Ad Hoc Working Group (AWG) on Further Commitments  for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol (17-25 May)."
---

    Both the UNFCCC Dialogue and the Ad Hoc Working Group under the  Kyoto Protocol were organized as a result of decisions taken  during the eleventh Conference of the Parties (COP 11) to the  UNFCCC and first Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting  of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (COP/MOP 1) in Montreal in  December 2005. The decision on the UNFCCC Dialogue (1/CP.11)  resolved to engage in a dialogue to exchange experiences and  analyze strategic approaches for long-term cooperative action on  climate change through an 'open and non-binding exchange of views,  information and ideas.' During the two-day Dialogue, several hundred participants engaged  in discussions and an exchange of views on the following issues:  advancing development goals in a sustainable way; addressing  action on adaptation; and realizing the full potential of  technology and market-based opportunities. During this informal  exchange of views, participants sat at round tables in a room that  appeared at first glance to be set up more for a wedding party  than for a dialogue on climate change. Some participants felt the  exchange demonstrated some common views on the long-term future of  the Convention. However, many commented that the first Dialogue  was just the start of a longer process, and that the many  divergent views on future action and directions could emerge more  clearly as the process continued.

The workshop had no binding or negotiated outcome, although a co- facilitators' report will be produced by August. The event was the  first of up to four workshops on this topic, all of which are to  be organized by the UNFCCC Secretariat.

# OPENING OF THE MEETING

On Monday morning, 15 May, Richard Kinley, Officer-in-Charge of  the UNFCCC Secretariat, welcomed delegates, noting that this  session marked the beginning of two weeks of UNFCCC-related  events, including SB 24, the UNFCCC Dialogue and the Ad Hoc  Working Group. Regarding the Dialogue, he noted submissions from a  number of parties, and drew attention to general agreement on the  need to strengthen action and to comments on market-based  mechanisms. He explained that implementation of the Kyoto Protocol  is moving ahead 'full steam,' with significant actions to achieve  the Kyoto targets, although some parties may still need to  intensify their efforts. He also noted approval of 180 Clean  Development Mechanism (CDM) projects, with 600 in the pipeline. He  added, however, that funding pledges made at COP/MOP 1 to support  the CDM Executive Board had not all yet been honored, and that the  Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee had also not received  all of its funding. Highlighting recent progress in work on  adaptation, he wished delegates success in their work.

Sigmar Gabriel, Federal Minister for the Environment, Nature  Conservation and Nuclear Safety of Germany, drew attention to  discussions at the recent 14th session of the UN Commission on  Sustainable Development (CSD-14), which had highlighted that over  1.6 billion people still lack proper access to energy, and the  need to support developing countries to adopt environmentally- friendly energy sources. He identified the CDM as a good example  of North-South cooperation, stressed that recent fluctuations in  carbon markets will not affect the market's importance and  viability, and emphasized the European Union's (EU) goal of  restricting climate change to 2o Celsius or less.

Rona Ambrose, Canada's Environment Minister and President of COP  11 and COP/MOP 1, emphasized climate change impacts in Canada's  Arctic regions. She said that future international cooperation has  the possibility to do more than just reduce greenhouse gas  emissions, but also ensure cleaner air and improved human health.  She underlined the need for a global approach focusing on  adaptation, technology and policy instruments, and stressed that  all parties must be involved.

### ORGANIZATION OF THE MEETING

The co-facilitators of the Dialogue,  Howard Bamsey (Australia) and Sandea de Wet (South Africa)  outlined the planned organization of the meeting, noting that it  was not a negotiation, but rather an open and non-binding  discussion held 'without prejudice to any future negotiations,  commitments, process, framework or mandate under the Convention.'  Noting that delegates would bring a range of different views and  expectations to these new and experimental discussions, Bamsey  encouraged a focus on creative thinking, open dialogue and  concrete actions. He added that the outcome of the meeting, a  report by the co-facilitators, would not represent a consensus  text or decision, but would serve as input for consideration at  COP 12 and COP 13.

    He explained that the workshop would begin with an initial  exchange of views. This would be followed by a segment to exchange  experiences and analyze strategic approaches for long-term  cooperative action in four thematic areas.

 advancing development  goals in a sustainable way; addressing action on adaptation;  realizing the full potential of technology; and realizing the full  potential of market-based opportunities. Following this, there  would be an exchange of views and ideas on how to enable parties  to continue developing appropriate national and international  responses to climate change, promote research and investment,  support action put forward voluntarily by developing countries,  and promote access by developing countries to cleaner technologies  and technologies for adaptation. The Dialogue would conclude with  a discussion on future work and the focus of the second workshop.

# EXCHANGE OF VIEWS ON ISSUES TO BE DISCUSSED IN THE DIALOGUE

On Monday morning, parties engaged in an initial exchange of views  about the issues on the Dialogue's agenda. A number of speakers  stressed the need to address climate change in the broader context  of sustainable development, while many also commented on  technology development and transfer, energy sector policies and  measures, market mechanisms, mitigation and adaptation.

Norway underscored the critical importance of an effective and  appropriate international response to climate change. He favored a  broad approach to the discussions, since climate change relates to  many issues, and suggested inviting think tanks as well  governments to provide pre-meeting submissions and inputs.

South Africa stressed the principle of common but differentiated  responsibilities, urged improved organization and consolidation of  existing work programmes, and highlighted the notion of 'positive  incentives' to encourage and support action in developing  countries across a range of activities. She stressed the value of  sustainable development policies and measures, the need for  increased technology research and transfer, and the need for a  Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) programme of work on  adaptation.

China observed that some aspects of the UNFCCC had not yet been  implemented, as emissions have not declined, and technology  transfer and capacity building have not been adequate. He  supported taking UNFCCC implementation to a new level, stated that  economic development was crucial to achieving sustainable  development, and endorsed increased progress on adaptation. While  observing that market mechanisms alone are not sufficient to  address climate change, he said the CDM was a relatively sound  mechanism that should continue to function after 2012.

Austria, speaking on behalf of the EU, underscored the 2oC  temperature target, noting that a decrease in emissions of 15-50%  was required by 2050. He stressed that the acceleration of climate  change could render adaptation impossible in some cases, and said  developed nations should continue to take the lead. Noting that  Annex I parties cannot fight climate change alone, he urged  discussion on how to achieve the Millennium Development Goals  while following a low carbon emissions path.

Brazil stressed the urgency of climate change and the need to  focus strictly on the UNFCCC. He said developing countries should  receive positive incentives for doing more in terms of mitigation.  Stating that no additional carbon mechanisms are needed, he said  opportunities for market participation should be explored,  including trade in renewable energies.

Saudi Arabia stated that whether climate change is occurring or  not is irrelevant to the UNFCCC, since the Convention is based on  the precautionary principle. He said Annex I countries have not  taken the lead. Slovenia said a clear goal and decision on how to  implement the UNFCCC fully is required. Japan stressed the need to  focus on greenhouse gas stabilization and for engagement of all  major emitters. He called for pragmatic approaches, underscored  technology for energy efficiency and urged 'solidarity.' Noting  that the world today is very different than it was in 1992 when  the UNFCCC was adopted, he asked how long the 'divide' in how  countries address climate change can be maintained.

The Republic of Korea said lessons from previous in-session  workshops on adaptation and mitigation should be considered in the  discussion. Chile spoke about the negative effects of climate  change, poverty and lack of access to energy.

Iceland stressed the need for collective action and supported  using renewable energy, especially in developing countries. He  proposed standards and benchmarking, tied to the Convention, for  specific key industries and sectors. He also proposed analyzing  the positive and negative effects of subsidies and taxes on  climate change, and discussion on how to strengthen the role of  land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF).

France stressed the need to change patterns of energy and  infrastructure investments and to focus on how to provide the  positive incentives to steer that investment. Hungary asked  whether the CDM and sinks should be extended to work under the  Convention. Tuvalu reminded delegates that small island states  depend on collective action by the global community for their  sustainable development, and argued that LULUCF creates  disincentives for mitigation, in particular for renewable energy.

The US supported other speakers' comments on consolidating work  programmes and linkages with trade, while cautioning against in- depth discussions on the temperature limits suggested by some. He  highlighted strong agreement among speakers on the need to address  climate change in the context of sustainable development, and also  noted work on technology research development and demonstration  projects.

New Zealand suggested that this Dialogue and future workshops  could assess progress on UNFCCC implementation, identify relevant  knowledge that was not available when the Convention was signed in  the 1990s, and consider how to simplify the measurement and  information requirements placed on parties, without sacrificing  environmental integrity. Switzerland urged a strong focus on  mitigation and using market-based opportunities to their full  extent in all regions. He stressed that this meeting should be  linked to other processes on long-term action, such as the Ad Hoc  Working Group under the Kyoto Protocol.

Canada said the magnitude of the climate change problem dictates  that governments must work with the private sector. Burkina Faso  noted the growing impact of extreme events such as drought,  desertification and floods, and called for an end to delays and  inaction. Algeria said current commitments should be a focus of  discussion.

# EXCHANGE OF EXPERIENCES AND ANALYSIS OF STRATEGIC APPROACHES FOR  LONG-TERM COOPERATIVE ACTION IN FOUR THEMATIC AREAS

Following the initial exchange of views on Monday morning and  afternoon, delegates shared experiences and opinions on strategic  approaches for long-term cooperative action in four thematic  areas: advancing development goals in a sustainable way;  addressing action on adaptation; realizing the full potential of  technology; and realizing the full potential of market-based  opportunities.

### ADVANCING DEVELOPMENT GOALS IN A SUSTAINABLE WAY

On advancing  development goals in a sustainable way, Uganda expressed concerns  that climate change was making global economic inequalities even  more pronounced, and Singapore outlined its experience as a small  island state and its various policies and approaches. The  Philippines underscored the divide between commitments made at  high-level negotiations on sustainable development and actual  negotiations at the technical level. Belarus stressed the need to  educate children on sustainable development and climate change. He  supported setting standards on energy consumption per unit of  production.

Australia said it looked forward to the fourth assessment report  of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). She said  Australia respects countries who decide to define what level of  temperature change might constitute 'dangerous climate change'  when setting their own goals and targets, but that discussion on  the adoption of such a definition by the Convention is not  appropriate at the moment.

### ADAPTATION

Tanzania and the Philippines said adaptation should  have the same status as mitigation, expressing concerns that it  had not yet been seriously addressed. Tuvalu underscored  adaptation as a crucial issue, and called for urgent action rather  than studies or pilot projects, implementation of UNFCCC Article  4.4 (developed country support for adaptation for vulnerable  developing countries) and a process to ensure a rapid response to  help countries suffering damage. The Philippines highlighted the  need for innovative ways of financing. Egypt noted that mitigation  efforts in developing countries are receiving more support than  adaptation measures through the CDM.

### TECHNOLOGY

On technology, the Russian Federation said much needs  to be done to promote renewable and alternative energies, but  cautioned that traditional energy sources such as fossil fuels  would inevitably continue to be employed, and urged a focus on  technology development and transfer to reduce their impact.  Australia stressed technology and land-use approaches, welcoming a  COP initiative to reduce deforestation in developing countries.  She underscored that a ton of reduced carbon dioxide is the same  regardless of the source or technology, and that there should not  be ideological positions on this. Argentina said means should be  found to ensure that CDM implementation results in technology  transfer.

### MARKET-BASED OPPORTUNITIES

The Russian Federation supported a  'truly global carbon market.' Tanzania said the problem cannot be  left to the market alone, noting that obstacles to developing  country participation, such as inadequate institutional capacities  and lack of awareness, must first be addressed. Thailand  underscored that the CDM is not the sole mechanism for technology  transfer and noted that there is a limit to what market mechanisms  can do.

# EXCHANGE OF VIEWS ON RESPONSES TO CLIMATE CHANGE, RESEARCH AND  INVESTMENT, VOLUNTARY ACTION, ACCESS TO TECHNOLOGIES AND  ADAPTATION

On Tuesday morning, 16 May, Co-Facilitator Bamsey opened the  meeting, emphasizing that the previous day's discussions had been  valuable. He noted that the workshop agenda also referred to an  exchange of views and ideas on how to enable parties to continue  developing appropriate national and international responses to  climate change, promote research and investment, support action  put forward voluntarily by developing countries, and promote  access by developing countries to cleaner technologies and  technologies for adaptation. He noted, however, that parties  should feel free to comment on any relevant issues in this  experimental format. He then opened the floor for comments.

Many delegates responded, with comments ranging over issues such  as adaptation, financing and investment, the role of the private  sector, technology, 'positive incentives,' as well as lessons  learned from national experiences and changes since the UNFCCC was  agreed in 1992.

India noted the relationship between energy consumption per capita  and the human development index. He stressed technology transfer  of clean technologies and the Asia-Pacific partnership. He said  carbon savings from nuclear technology and hydropower storage  should be tradable.

Noting the unwillingness to change lifestyles, the Republic of  Korea stressed the future role of technology and the need for  technology policies. He drew attention to existing technology  cooperation initiatives outside the UNFCCC and said the Convention  should provide an opportunity for those initiatives to be  presented and linked to the UNFCCC.

Sweden emphasized that the task is to achieve development and at  the same time reduce greenhouse gas emissions. He said de-linking  growth from emissions is possible, citing Sweden as an example,  where the economy grew 30% during a period when greenhouse gas  emissions actually declined. He indicated that the key for  Sweden's de-linking was a carbon tax. Canada called for better  deployment of existing technologies and aggressive diffusion and  demonstration of innovative technologies. He noted innovative  approaches for international cooperation, such as those that are  sectoral or intensity-based.

The Philippines said donors should not place conditions on  funding, particularly for adaptation, and urged innovative  mechanisms for financing adaptation. Norway urged discussion on a  sectoral approach and on financing. Saudi Arabia stated that the  UNFCCC, which is a 'framework' treaty, could be built upon but  that its basic principles should not change. He urged solidarity  from Annex I parties to meet their commitments. Uganda stated that  all the issues being taken up in the Dialogue eventually come down  to technology, and expressed concerns that a market approach could  further exacerbate the economic imbalance between different  developing countries.

Germany highlighted the question of how to achieve the UNFCCC's  ultimate objective, and stressed that it was not the EU's  intention to negotiate its 2oC target. Ghana said the three Rio  conventions (on desertification, biodiversity and climate change)  should be addressed together in order to achieve sustainable  development. He suggested that the IPCC be commissioned to analyze  the costs of adaptation, and supported sectoral approaches for  technology transfer. The Netherlands noted that one barrier to low  carbon technologies is that climate change costs are not reflected  in prices.

Brazil highlighted the potential of biofuels to mitigate climate  change. Noting a lack of means and capacity, he urged a new  paradigm to make South-South cooperation effective. France said  infrastructure choices must allow for development and also for low  emission paths. Saint Lucia, on behalf of AOSIS, said the 2oC  target is unacceptably high for small island developing states,  while agreeing that a science-based target is needed.

The European Community stressed the role of the private sector,  noting that the total value of the global carbon market in 2005  was many times greater than government funding for the Global  Environment Facility. He stressed the importance of a global  carbon market with a sound legislative and regulatory framework  and long-term certainty. South Africa expressed concern at the  lack of progress on technology transfer, identifying financing as  a major obstacle.

The UK identified some cross-cutting themes, including financing  and scientific uncertainty, which is particularly problematic for  adaptation. China urged intensifying efforts to implement the  Convention rather than considering changing the basic principles  or developing a new mechanism. He highlighted the principle of  common but differentiated responsibilities. Japan stressed the  importance of mitigation, without which some adaptation could  become unaffordable.

Kazakhstan said adaptation measures are vital. Chile said the CDM  is just one option for technology transfer. Papua New Guinea  outlined its proposal to replace perverse incentives for  deforestation with positive incentives to avoid deforestation by  valuing ecosystem services and reforming commodity pricing. He  urged flexible incentives for North-South and South-South  relations.

The Russian Federation noted lack of scientific certainty relating  to climate systems, the value of reliable data, and the critical  importance of technology transfer. Cameroon highlighted the  debilitating costs of climate change that is already occurring in  developing countries due to increased drought and other phenomena.  Cuba noted the impact of extreme weather events, highlighted the  need to act now even without perfect knowledge, and stressed the  importance of effective early warning systems. Reporting on Cuba's  efforts to improve its energy systems, he highlighted the  opportunities for progress when financial and technological  support is combined with political will.

Kenya underscored adaptation and funding for sustainable  development policies and measures. She stressed that only 2% of  CDM projects are in Africa. New Zealand emphasized the question of  what shape long-term action could take, noting that many ideas  have been presented but that a 'reality check' in the UNFCCC  context is needed. He underscored that some of those ideas will be  needed no matter how existing provisions of the UNFCCC are  implemented.

Tuvalu noted discussions on the same issues at CSD-14 and stressed  the need for direct linkages between climate change and  sustainable development. He underscored the need to recognize the  Mauritius Strategy and said savings from home-grown technologies  will help to cope with adaptation costs.

# OBSERVER ORGANIZATIONS

On Tuesday afternoon, observer organizations were invited to  present their observations to the group. Environmental non- governmental organizations underscored the 'planetary emergency'  climate change presents, noting that the time remaining to address  it is rapidly running out. He said the need for agreement on what  constitutes dangerous levels of climate change was long overdue.  He also underscored the need to expand market mechanisms  significantly in order to reduce emissions, noting that deep  reduction commitments are required to maintain the carbon market,  and that voluntary commitments are not adequate.

Business and Industry groups said business expects consistent,  coherent, long-term policies that provide markets with the  necessary signals to undertake investments. She said policy should  be flexible to accommodate new scientific evidence and correct  unintended consequences of previous policies. She added that long- term action should pursue voluntary and market-oriented  approaches, address capital markets, and stimulate research and  development and capacity building, particularly in developing  countries. She also called for the promotion of public-private  partnerships and welcomed the G8 and Asia-Pacific Partnerships.

# GUIDANCE ON THE ORGANIZATION OF FUTURE WORKSHOPS

Late on Tuesday afternoon, Co-Facilitator Bamsey invited delegates  to provide guidance on the organization of work of subsequent  workshops. Most delegates noted the need for focused discussions.

    The US suggested devoting half a day to each of the four items,  with a presentation leading each item. He said the co-facilitators  could prepare questions that capture the current discussion and  circulate them among parties well in advance of the next Dialogue.

Switzerland said the second workshop should concentrate on  technical or practical activities. He suggested that the co- facilitators should provide a document by the end of August 2006.

South Africa suggested that the second workshop could consider  technology transfer and market opportunities, while the third  could consider sustainable development and adaptation, and the  fourth might take up cross-cutting issues such as funding. She  said a further workshop on positive incentives could be useful,  and said consideration should be given to what the outcome(s) of  these workshops should be.

Norway noted that this workshop had been much more constructive  than he had expected, without the 'shaming and blaming' he had  been concerned about. He expressed confidence that the co- facilitators, in consultation with the UNFCCC Secretariat, could  select key issues and invite appropriate speakers for the  subsequent workshops. He requested that each future workshop focus  on just a few key questions.

Brazil stressed that the workshops should be consistent with the  original COP 11 decision. The EU said this workshop had helped  parties understand one another better. She noted parties' comments  on the need for subsequent workshops to cover just one or two key  topics. She also suggested a focus on cooperative actions and said  a set of helpful questions could be developed.

Hungary noted the constructive dialogue and urged discussions on  barriers and opportunities to enhance UNFCCC implementation. He  urged strict time limits on speakers so the dialogue flows and is  interactive.

Canada said the workshops should build on work already carried out  under the UNFCCC and draw on relevant processes outside the  UNFCCC. China said the second workshop should focus on parties'  actions taken to implement the Convention, actions that should  have been taken, and steps to overcome obstacles to  implementation. Noting that many bilateral technology-transfer  activities are not conducted through the UNFCCC, Japan said future  discussions should consider broader issues in examining  implementation.

Saudi Arabia said the dialogue should focus exclusively on  enhancing implementation and on the four areas described in the  relevant COP 11 decision. The Philippines said lessons learned so  far should be consolidated and there should be a review of how all  countries have implemented their commitments to date.

Co-Facilitator Bamsey said he and his colleague would present  proposals on how to organize the next Dialogue by the end of  August, and welcomed additional written contributions by the end  of May. Thanking participants for their presentations, ideas and  input, he closed the meeting at 6:13 pm.