---
title: "THE THIRD CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE UN FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE, 1 DECEMBER 1997"
id: enb1268e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1268e
date: 1997-12-01
abstract: "The Third Conference of the Parties (COP-3) to the UN Framework Convention on  Climate Change (FCCC) opened on 1 December 1997 in Kyoto, Japan. In a morning  Plenary session, participants heard welcoming addresses. In the afternoon,  delegates considered reports from the FCCC subsidiary bodies, discussed  organizational matters and established a Committee of the Whole (COW).  In the evening, the COW established a number of working groups."
---

# OPENING PLENARY

Chen Chimutengwende (Zimbabwe), President of the Second Conference of the  Parties (COP-2), stated that delegates face a political dilemma of apportioning  responsibility for the historical burden that humanity has placed on itself. He  called for acknowledgement of developing country efforts already underway and  said it would not be possible for these countries to take on new commitments  under the new instrument. He said delegates must agree on: a fair system of  apportionment of emission limits; a globally agreed reduction pathway; and a  projected sustainable and equitable future emission level. He called for  reliable and predictable financial provisions to acquire sound technologies in  developing countries.

Hiroshi Ohki (Japan) was elected President of COP-3. He said COP-3's most  important task is to establish a more concrete international framework for  protecting the global climate. He stressed the need to discuss steps to be taken  after Kyoto to implement the protocol and said not all climate change problems  could be solved in Kyoto.

Delegates were also welcomed: by Keizo Obuchi, Minister of Foreign Affairs of  Japan; Teiichi Aramaki, Governor of the Prefecture of Kyoto; and Yorikane  Masumoto, Mayor of Kyoto.

FCCC Executive Secretary Michael Zammit Cutajar noted that, at an estimated  10,000 attendants, COP-3 beats all records for participation in a meeting on  climate change. He stressed that the focus of the Conference should be its end  product. He noted that in a recent exchange of views with a group of  business people, one of them had suggested that there should be 'no fudge' in  the Kyoto agreement.

The goals and the rules for attaining them should be clearly defined. He  contrasted this approach with the propaganda from certain industrial sectors  that 'unashamedly plays games with the science and statistics of climate  change.' He said that 'in the present constellation of economic and political  power, it is those who have already built their strength - often through  unsustainable economic growth - who must lead the way towards a sustainable  future,' and called for a clear, binding and verifiable commitment by  industrialized countries to reduce their emissions below 1990 levels early in  the next century.

The G-77/CHINA noted that developing countries are the most vulnerable to  climate change and the least able to adapt, and are committed to modify trends  in human-induced emissions through the principle of common but differentiated  responsibility. The delay between production of emissions and their effects  requires Annex I countries to take the first steps and they should be blamed if  Kyoto fails.

He objected to the proposed 'post-Kyoto evolutionary process' and to threats to  aid unless developing countries accept it. The EU reiterated its position  favoring: a 15% cut in emissions by developed countries, jointly or  individually, by 2010; specific policies and measures (P&Ms); and consideration  of new commitments for developing countries under Article 7.1(a) in the future.  The RUSSIAN FEDERATION reiterated its proposal that each Annex I country  consolidate its emissions into aggregate 'carbon dioxide equivalents' with the  obligations of each Annex I country set out in an attachment and determined  according to Annex B. The US favored a target based on all GHGs, sources, and  sinks, flexibility, and meaningful participation of key developing countries.  She offered flexibility on limited, carefully bounded differentiation and  proposed a working group to examine differentiation, including the Russian  proposal. She noted concerns regarding the EU proposal for restrictions on  emissions trading, the EU's target in light of its economic advantage under  their bubble proposal, the breadth of differentiation implied, and EU member  state accountability. She favored different targets for developing countries,  such as emissions growth targets. Developing countries that assume voluntary  commitments under the proposed Article 10 could gain new resources and  technology through emissions trading.

The President noted that the ratification status report (FCCC/ CP/1997/INF.2),  indicating that 167 states and the EU had become Parties, showed the nearly  universal recognition of the importance of climate change issues. On adoption of  rules of procedure (FCCC/ CP/1997/5), he noted a draft decision suggesting that  the COP adopt all rules except rule 22, paragraph 1 on election of the Bureau  and rule 42, paragraph 1 on voting in the absence of consensus, applying those  rules until agreement is reached.

VENEZUELA, SAUDI ARABIA, and KUWAIT objected to adopting incomplete rules.  ARGENTINA and AOSIS supported the draft decision. The EU supported the draft  decision but suggested that rule 22 was already agreed. The President called for  consultations, and said the COP would continue to apply the draft rules except  rule 42.

The provisional agenda (FCCC/CP/1997/1), annotations on the organization of work  (FCCC/CP/1997/1/Add.1), the list of documents (FCCC/CP/1997/1/Add.2), and a  document on the high level segment (FCCC/CP/1997/L.1) were adopted.  On election of officers other than President, delegates elected Bakary Kante  SENEGAL) SBI Chair, a representative of IRAN SBI Vice Chair, George Manful  (GHANA), T. Gzirishvili (GEORGIA), Anthony Clarke (CANADA), Cornelia Quennet- Thielen (GERMANY), Sergio Selaya Bonilla (HONDURAS), Luis Herrera (VENEZUELA),  Kok Kee Chow (MALAYSIA) and Espen Ronneberg (MARSHALL ISLANDS), Vice Presidents,  and Maciej Sadowski (POLAND) Rapporteur.

# REPORTS OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES

Tibor Faragó (Hungary) introduced the report and draft decisions of the  Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA)  (FCCC/SBSTA/1997/14). Delegates noted the report of SBSTA and adopted its draft  decisions on cooperation with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  (IPCC) and the development of observational networks. Joint SBSTA/SBI draft  decisions were adopted on the development and transfer of technology and  activities implemented jointly (AIJ). Mahmoud Ould El Ghaouth (Mauritania) introduced the Subsidiary Body for  Implementation (SBI) report, which was noted by the COP. Delegates adopted a  joint SBI/SBSTA draft decision on the division of labor between SBI and SBSTA.  Other adopted decisions addressed: the volume of documentation; Annex I Party  communications; review of the financial mechanism; the Annex to Memorandum of  Understanding; the financial performance of the Convention in the biennium 1996- 1997; and arrangements for administrative support to the Convention Secretariat.  Patrick Széll (UK) introduced the report of the Ad Hoc Group on Article 13,  which considered the establishment of a multilateral consultative process (MCP).  He noted that the group reached two conclusions: the MCP should be advisory  rather than supervisory in nature and AG13 should not complete its work until  after COP-3. He said there are still questions remaining: whether Article 13  requires a 'process' or 'committee;' who may trigger the regime; and whether the  MCP should provide assistance to developing countries or 'consultative' advice  to all countries. COP-3 noted the report of AG13 and adopted a draft decision  that enabled the AG13 to continue its work.

Raúl Estrada Oyuela (Argentina) reported to COP-3 on the work of the AGBM. He  said AGBM-6 took a step forward by requesting the Chair to complete the  negotiating text for a protocol or other legally binding instrument by 1 June  1997. He indicated that the results of the work of the AGBM on a protocol or  another legal instrument are contained in the revised text under negotiation  (FCCC/CP/1997/2). An addendum to this document contains a draft proposal to  amend the Convention. The Chair drew attention to a number of issues that were  not fully addressed in the AGBM, such as: methodologies to estimate emissions by  sources and removals by sinks; the treatment of sinks under the new instrument;  a proposal made by Brazil; and the issue of future development of commitments  for all Parties, referred to by some as 'evolution.' Estrada indicated that the draft negotiating text contains numerous square  brackets and alternatives. He urged delegations to produce an agreement that  Parties could comply with. He said the efforts of key developing country Parties  to mitigate climate change are frequently overlooked and called attention to  reasons given by different developed countries to refuse or delay the  strengthening of their commitments. He said that while there are indications  that some countries are not willing to fulfill FCCC objectives, the vast  majority of Parties are willing to adopt a set of legally binding rules to  strengthen commitments.

On Agenda Item 2, organizational matters, a Committee of the Whole (COW) was  established to take decisions on the Berlin Mandate, with Estrada elected as  Chair. The COP President noted the COW should address outstanding issues  including, inter alia, the Brazilian proposal and future development of  commitments of all Parties.

The G-77/CHINA, supported by INDIA, BRAZIL, CHINA, MALAYSIA, SAUDI ARABIA,  EGYPT, INDONESIA and AOSIS, objected to discussing evolution of commitments. He  noted the FCCC strikes a careful balance on review of commitments only for Annex  I Parties, under the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities.  The commitments developed countries made in Rio have not been honored, nor are  proposals for the protocol likely to match scientific recommendations. Instead,  attempts are being made to introduce commitments for non-Annex I Parties. INDIA cited the decision of COP-1 that the Berlin Mandate be confined to  reviewing the commitments of Annex I countries on strengthening developed  countries' commitments to GHG reductions and operationalization of resources  transfer. He agreed with the AGBM report's conclusion that the evolution clause  contravenes the Berlin Mandate. BRAZIL noted that its proposal is useful, while  the evolution clause is an extraneous distraction from the main purpose of  reducing the emissions of the main Annex I polluters. CHINA said the evolution  proposal is: outside the scope of the Berlin Mandate process, which prevails  until its outcome is adopted at COP-3; a political move to let some countries  evade their responsibilities; intended to destroy the FCCC's principle of common  but differentiated responsibilities; and intended to lead to the failure of COP- 3.

MALAYSIA compared developed countries' inability to make meaningful commitments  in 1992 to their current lack of good faith over commitments for the period  after 2000, and noted they have also failed to fulfill their commitments on  transfer of technology.

The US said that the COP was the supreme body of the Convention, and discussion  about the evolution of commitments was under its purview. He noted that the  issue at hand was not to debate this purview, but rather decide how outstanding  issues such as this one would be dealt with during COP-3.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

The US delegation reportedly surprised the EU, not to mention a number of  observers, with a call for a working group to look more closely at  differentiation, including Russia's proposal, sometimes known as the 'big  bubble.' The US statement raised the prospect that a variation of 'big bubble'  could surface in the QELROs negotiations. While some observers view the  development as a possible 'way out' for the US, permitting each party to choose  its own reduction target, it is thought to be too early to judge the overall  significance of this development. As it stands, the Russian formulation would  transform the EU 15 percent reduction into a unilateral pledge, something the  Europeans are expected to resist. Some participants predict that the EU may have  to give some ground on differentiation.

# COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE (COW)

The COW held its first meeting in the evening and formed several negotiating  groups to deal with remaining issues. The group on QELROs will deal with Article  3 of the negotiating text, methodologies, emissions trading, joint  implementation and annexes. Two groups are to discuss coverage and  differentiation, a group on financial issues will also discuss the proposal for  a clean development fund, and two groups would consider institutions and  mechanisms and advancing commitments under Article 4.1. The group on QELROs is  to be chaired by Raul Estrada Oyuela.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### COW

A group on QELROs will meet in morning and evening sessions. A group on  institutions and mechanisms will meet in morning and afternoon session. A group  on Article 4.1 will meet in the afternoon.