---
title: "SUMMARY OF WORKSHOPS ON ARTICLE 4.8 AND 4.9 OF THE UNFCCC: ADVERSE EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE AND THE IMPACT OF IMPLEMENTATION OF RESPONSE MEASURES, 9-11 AND 13-15 MARCH 2000"
id: enb12125e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12125e
date: 2000-03-15
abstract: "Two workshops on Article 4.8 and 4.9 of the UN Framework Convention on Climate  Change (FCCC) were held from 9-11 and 13-15 March 2000 at the Internationales  Kongresszentrum Bundehaus in Bonn, Germany. The FCCC Secretariat and the Chairs  of the FCCC subsidiary bodies organized these workshops. Approximately 85  participants attended each workshop, including representatives of governments,  intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and  academic institutions."
---

The first workshop was held from 9-11 March to consider initial actions to meet  the specific needs and concerns of developing country Parties and the specific  needs and special situations of the least developed countries (LDCs) arising  from the adverse effects of climate change. Participants heard presentations and  engaged in discussions on the adverse effects of climate change on food  security, water resources, economic activities, coastal zones and human health.  They also considered initial actions related to funding, insurance and the  transfer of technology to meet the needs and circumstances of developing  countries. Other issues addressed included actions to: enhance capacity for  monitoring, systematic observation and vulnerability assessment in developing  countries; build capacity in environmental management and integrated assessment;  and identify adaptation options and facilitate appropriate adaptation.

The second workshop was held from 13-15 March to consider the impact of the  implementation of response measures to climate change. Participants heard  presentations and engaged in discussions on methodological approaches and what  actions are necessary under the FCCC relating to the impact of implementation of  response measures on, inter alia, terms of trade, international capital flows  and developmental efforts, in accordance with FCCC Article 4.8 and 4.9 and in  the light of matters related to Kyoto Protocol Article 3.14 (adverse effects).  Participants also considered the nature, content and sources of information  required in relation to this issue, procedures and modalities for the provision  of information, and what actions are needed, including those relating to  funding, insurance and the transfer of technology. The specific needs and  special situations of LDCs were considered.

The outcome of these workshops will be a report from the Chairs of the FCCC  subsidiary bodies that will provide an input for discussions on these issues at  the twelfth and thirteenth sessions of the subsidiary bodies (SB-12 and SB-13),  to be held in June and September 2000 respectively. Negotiations at SB-12 and  SB-13 will lead to a decision at the Sixth Conference of the Parties to the FCCC  (COP-6), to be held in The Hague in from 13-24 November 2000.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FCCC AND THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

The FCCC was adopted on 9 May 1992 and opened for signature at the UN Conference  on Environment and Development in June 1992. The FCCC entered into force on 21  March 1994, 90 days after receipt of the 50th ratification. It has currently  received 181 instruments of ratification.

### COP-1

The first Conference of the Parties to the FCCC (COP-1) took place in  Berlin from 28 March - 7 April 1995. In addition to addressing a number of  important issues related to the future of the FCCC, delegates reached agreement  on the adequacy of commitments and adopted the 'Berlin Mandate.' Delegates  agreed to establish an open-ended Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate (AGBM) to  begin a process toward appropriate action for the period beyond 2000, including  the strengthening of commitments by Annex I Parties (Parties with developed  economies or economies in transition) through the adoption of a protocol or  other legal instrument. COP-1 also requested the Secretariat to make  arrangements for sessions of the subsidiary bodies on scientific and  technological advice (SBSTA) and implementation (SBI). SBSTA serves as the link  between the information provided by competent international bodies, and the  policy-oriented needs of the COP. SBI was created to develop recommendations to  assist the COP in the review and assessment of the implementation of the  Convention and in the preparation and implementation of its decisions.

### AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE

The AGBM met eight times between August 1995  and COP-3 in December 1997. During the first three sessions, delegates focused  on analyzing and assessing possible policies and measures to strengthen the  commitments of Annex I Parties, how Annex I countries might distribute or share  new commitments and whether commitments should take the form of an amendment or  a protocol. AGBM-4, which coincided with COP-2 in Geneva in July 1996, completed  its in-depth analysis of the likely elements of a protocol and States appeared  ready to prepare a negotiating text. At AGBM-5, which met in December 1996,  delegates recognized the need to decide whether or not to permit Annex I Parties  to use mechanisms that would provide them with flexibility in meeting their  quantified emissions limitation and reduction objectives (QELROs).

As the protocol was drafted during the sixth and seventh sessions of the AGBM,  in March and August 1997, respectively, delegates 'streamlined' a framework  compilation text by merging or eliminating some overlapping provisions within  the myriad of proposals. Much of the discussion centered on a proposal from the  EU for a 15% cut in a 'basket' of three greenhouse gases (GHG) by the year 2010  compared to 1990 emission levels. In October 1997, as AGBM-8 began, US President  Bill Clinton included a call for 'meaningful participation' by developing  countries in the negotiating position he announced in Washington. In response,  the G-77/China distanced itself from attempts to draw developing countries into  agreeing to new commitments.

### COP-3

The Third Conference of the Parties (COP-3) was held from 1-11 December  1997 in Kyoto, Japan. Over 10,000 participants, including representatives from  governments, IGOs, NGOs and the media, attended the Conference, which included a  high-level segment featuring statements from over 125 ministers. Following a  week and a half of intense formal and informal negotiations, Parties to the FCCC  adopted the Kyoto Protocol on 11 December 1997.

In the Protocol, Annex I Parties to the FCCC agreed to commitments with a view  to reducing their overall emissions of six GHGs by at least 5% below 1990 levels  between 2008 and 2012. The Protocol also established emissions trading, 'joint  implementation' (JI) between developed countries, and a 'clean development  mechanism' (CDM) to encourage joint emissions reduction projects between  developed and developing countries. To date, 84 countries have signed and 22  have ratified the Protocol. The Protocol will enter into force 90 days after 55  States, including Annex I Parties representing at least 55% of the total carbon  dioxide emissions for 1990, ratify it.

### COP-4

The Fourth Conference of the Parties (COP-4) was held from 2-13 November  1998 in Buenos Aires, Argentina, with over 5,000 participants in attendance.  During the two-week meeting, delegates deliberated decisions for the COP during  SBI-9 and SBSTA-9. Issues related to the Protocol were considered in joint  SBI/SBSTA sessions. A high-level segment, which heard statements from over 100  ministers and heads of delegation, was convened on Thursday, 12 November.  Following hours of high-level closed-door negotiations and a final plenary  session, delegates adopted the Buenos Aires Plan of Action (BAPA). Under BAPA,  the Parties declared their determination to strengthen the implementation of the  FCCC and prepare for the future entry into force of the Protocol. The BAPA  contains the Parties' resolution to demonstrate substantial progress on: the  financial mechanism; the development and transfer of technology; the  implementation of FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9, as well as Protocol Articles 2.3  and 3.14 (adverse effects); activities implemented jointly (AIJ); the mechanisms  of the Protocol; and the preparations for the first Conference of the Parties  serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Protocol (COP/MOP-1). On the issue  of adverse effects, delegates to COP-4 agreed on a programme of work that  included provision for an expert workshop, to be held in September 1999.

### SBI-10 AND SBSTA-10

The subsidiary bodies to the FCCC held their tenth sessions  in Bonn, Germany, from 31 May - 11 June 1999, and began the process of  fulfilling the BAPA. SBI discussed, inter alia, administrative and financial  matters and non-Annex I (developing country Party) communications. SBSTA  considered topics such as Annex I communications, methodological issues, the  development and transfer of technology, and adverse effects. SBI and SBSTA  jointly considered the mechanisms of the Protocol, AIJ and compliance.

In its consideration of adverse effects, SBSTA adopted the terms of reference  for the expert workshop agreed to at COP-4. The workshop was to identify:  factors that would determine the adverse effects of climate change and the  impacts of implementing response measures; and existing information gaps, needs  and views on methodologies. The workshop was also tasked with considering the  specific needs of the least developed countries, as well as issues raised in  national submissions and communications.

### WORKSHOP ON IMPLEMENTATION OF FCCC ARTICLE 4.8 AND 4.9 (ADVERSE EFFECTS)

Under  the guidance of SBSTA Chair Kok Kee Chow (Malaysia) and SBI Vice-Chair Mohammad  Reza Salamat (Iran), the workshop on adverse effects was held from 21 - 24  September 1999 in Bonn. The workshop included expert presentations followed by  panel discussions addressing the policy-related implications of the information  presented. Regarding preliminary actions, some participants suggested that the  policies and measures reported by Annex I Parties and the projected actions to  implement the Protocol be examined to analyze potential impacts on the economies  of the oil producing and other developing countries.

In this context, it was suggested that the FCCC subsidiary bodies continue to  examine information needed to minimize the adverse social, environmental and  economic impacts of Annex I Parties' response measures on developing countries,  including: tax restructuring to reflect the carbon content of fuels; measures to  discourage the production of fossil fuels and nuclear energy; compensation; and  assistance to developing countries, including increasing investment, to help  them diversify their economies. Other participants said the uncertainties  associated with the impact of implementing response measures are such that  consideration of specific actions was premature. They noted that such actions  under the Protocol would be considered at the COP serving as the Meeting of the  Parties to the Protocol at its first session (COP/MOP-1). They also recalled  that compensation was not provided for under the FCCC or the Protocol. Some  participants stressed the need to identify and analyze initial actions to meet  the specific needs and concerns of developing countries arising from the adverse  effects of climate change and the impact of response measures.

### COP-5

The Fifth Conference of the Parties (COP-5) met in Bonn, from 25 October  - 5 November 1999. With over 3000 participants in attendance and 165 Parties  represented, delegates continued their work toward meeting the two-year deadline  set out in the BAPA for strengthening FCCC implementation and preparing for the  future entry into force of the Kyoto Protocol. Ninety-three ministers and other  heads of delegation addressed COP-5 during a high-level segment held from 2-3  November. During its last two days, COP-5 adopted 32 draft decisions and  conclusions on, inter alia, the review of the implementation of commitments and  other FCCC provisions, and preparations for COP/MOP-1.

On adverse effects, the COP adopted decision 12/CP.5 on FCCC Article 4.8 and 4.9  and Protocol Article 3.14 (FCCC/CP/1999/6/Add.1). The decision recognized that  the identification of initial actions necessary to address the adverse effects  of climate change and/or the impact of the implementation of response measures  needs to be based on sufficient information and analysis within a clearly  defined process. The COP decided that the process of implementation of FCCC  Articles 4.8 and 4.9, as established by decisions 3/CP.3 and 5/CP.4, should,  inter alia, continue and gather information on initial actions needed to address  the specific needs and concerns of developing countries and LDCs arising from  climate change and/or the impact of the implementation of response measures, as  well as identify what actions are necessary under the Convention relating to  funding, insurance and transfer of technology to meet the specific needs and  concerns of developing countries and LDCs. It further decided that SB-12 would  continue consideration of the implementation of FCCC Article 4.8 and 4.9,  including consideration of the extent of developing countries' efforts to  diversify their national economies and of how the international community could  best support such efforts. The COP decided to organize two workshops under the  guidance of the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies: one on the consideration of  initial actions needed to meet the specific needs and concerns of developing  country Parties, and the specific needs and special situations of LDCs, arising  from the adverse effects of climate change; and another on the methodological  approaches and actions necessary to address the impact of the implementation of  response measures on, inter alia, terms of trade, international capital flows  and development efforts. The decision stated that the two workshops should be  organized in two consecutive but equal time periods, before 31 March 2000.

#     REPORT OF THE WORKSHOP on adverse effects of climatE chANGE

SBSTA Chair Harald Dovland (Norway) opened the meeting on 9 March and noted that  this workshop was the result of a decision taken at the Fifth Conference of the  Parties to the FCCC (COP-5). He stated that, under the COP-5 decision, this  workshop would consider initial actions to meet the specific needs and concerns  of developing country Parties and the specific needs and special situations of  LDCs arising from the adverse effects of climate change. Issues to be addressed  included: enhancing capacity in developing countries for monitoring, systematic  observation and vulnerability assessment; building capacity in environmental  management and integrated assessment; and identifying and facilitating  adaptation options where near-term climate change impacts are understood and  adaptation measures are feasible.

Chair Dovland said organizers had tried to ensure fair geographic distribution  and a balance between developed and developing countries in setting their  invitation list for this workshop. He noted that the workshop's outcome will be  a report from the Chairs of the FCCC subsidiary bodies that lists the main  points and issues raised by participants. The report will contain two sections.  The first will relate to this workshop, while the second will cover the workshop  on the impact of the implementation of response measures, scheduled for 13-15  March. This report will be presented at the Twelfth Meeting of the Subsidiary  Bodies (SB-12) in June 2000.

Claire Parker, Coordinator of the Implementation Programme of the FCCC  Secretariat, noted that this workshop would provide input into discussions on  this issue at SB-12 and SB-13, which will lead to a decision at COP-6. She said  this process should give new impetus for an international response to the needs  of countries vulnerable to climate change, including LDCs.

## OVERVIEW OF THE ADVERSE EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE

Youba Sokona, Deputy Executive Secretary of Environmental Development Action in  the Third World, and Thomas Downing of the Environmental Change Institute at the  University of Oxford, provided an overview of action on implementation of  Article 4.8 and 4.9.

Youba Sokona presented case study experience relating to droughts in the Sahel,  as well as studies on coping with cyclones and sea-level rise, noting the wide  range of coping strategies employed. These strategies included regional research  and monitoring initiatives, improved agricultural production technologies and  increased rural mobility. Coping strategies used in Bangladesh relating to  cyclones and sea-level rise included early warning systems, safe refuges, public  information and cultural acceptance of these measures. He said lessons learned  from recent flooding in Mozambique should be used to advance adaptation  strategies. He recommended early adaptation action at the international,  national and local levels involving strategies in the areas of: information  provision to encourage greater participation; capacity building; reconstruction  to reduce uncertainty; risk reduction through implementation of 'low regrets'  and 'no regrets' measures; and spreading the risk of adverse effects.

Tom Downing said priorities for adaptation should be based on the assessment of  vulnerability and risk, and highlighted criteria for evaluating adaptation  measures and strategies related to, inter alia, stakeholders and vulnerable  groups, resilience and effectiveness of the proposed measures, strategic  responses, timing and the likelihood of adverse impacts. He concluded by calling  for the immediate adoption of adaptation policies to protect vulnerable  populations and countries and for funds to put existing technologies into use.  He stated that such action could be justified on broad social and economic  grounds.

Chair Dovland then invited comments and questions from delegates on issues  raised during this presentation. Several participants addressed the issue of low  regrets and no regrets options, with a number noting that a clear definition of  these terms and what options fit into these categories would be valuable. The  SMALL ISLAND DEVELOPING STATES BRANCH OF THE UN DEPARTMENT FOR ECONOMIC AND  SOCIAL AFFAIRS (UNSIDS) agreed with the presenters' view that we know enough in  certain areas to take immediate action. He also noted difficulties in  quantifying environmental vulnerability. Several delegates underscored the need  to enhance developing country capacity for conducting vulnerability assessments.  The US noted that vulnerability will change over time, meaning ongoing  assessments by all Parties are desirable. He said adaptation issues should be  integrated into national development strategies. ZIMBABWE noted the need to  identify different levels of initial actions appropriate for countries with  different levels of development. She stated that capacity building is a cross- cutting issue.

In the afternoon session, Martin Parry of the Jackson Environment Institute at  the University of East Anglia, UK, presented recent research on impacts of  climate change across several sectors, drawing lessons for adaptation. He  summarized the likely global impacts of climate change under three scenarios:  business-as-usual; emissions reduction aimed at stabilizing CO2 levels at 750  parts per million; and emissions reduction aimed at stabilizing CO2 levels at  550 parts per million, which would require much deeper cuts that required under  the Kyoto Protocol. He noted that Africa and South Asia would be adversely  affected under all three scenarios. He stated that the two scenarios involving  CO2 reductions have the potential to delay massive forest degeneration and  reduce the increase in flooding. However, he noted that even these mitigation  scenarios would have minimal impact on water supply, food production and the  spread of malaria, meaning that adaptation would be a significant feature under  all three scenarios. In terms of mitigation measures, he underscored the  importance of the 2010-2030 period, and identified water management and species  loss as key areas in this regard.

## SESSIONS ON ADVERSE EFFECTS ON CLIMATE CHANGE

Following the opening speeches and overview of the adverse effects of climate  change, a number of individual sessions were held during 9 and 10 March to  review adverse effects in several specific areas: food security; water  resources; economic activities; coastal zones; human health; the needs and  situations of the LDCs; and, actions relating to funding, insurance and the  transfer of technology to meet the needs and circumstances of developing  countries.

### ADVERSE EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON FOOD SECURITY

On 9 March, Tom Downing made  a presentation on food security. Focusing on drought vulnerability and food  security, drew attention to existing vulnerability assessment and adaptation  efforts, and said climate diagnostics need to be integrated into responses at  the local level.

### ADVERSE EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES

On 9 March, Jan F.  Feenstra, Manager of the Netherlands Climate Change Studies Assistance Programme  of the Institute for Environmental Studies, made a presentation on the adverse  effects of climate change on economic activities. He noted that climate change  impact assessment requires both climate change scenarios and socio-economic  scenarios.

Regarding adaptation, he stated that three kinds of adaptation are important in  the context of adverse effects of climate change: autonomous adaptation, where  plants, animals and humans will modify their behavior in response to climate  change; planned adaptation, which results from policy decisions; and  maladaptation, where actions that do not take climate change into account  increase vulnerability to climate change.

He outlined a number of problems related to conducting impact and adaptation  studies in developing countries, including:lack of funding for impact and adaptation studies, as most available  funding goes toward inventory and mitigation studies; inadequate funds for technical assistance required to establish research  programmes and familiarize scientists with the relevant models and the requisite  multidisciplinary approach; the absence of data and funds to collect data; poor channels of communication between scientists, policy makers and  stakeholders, as well as lack of involvement among government departments, other  than the Ministry for the Environment; problems in motivating policy makers to take action on an issue where  results are uncertain, particularly in light of the relatively short political  cycle; and, the lack of specific adaptation projects resulting from impact  assessments, often due to lack of funds.

Solutions to these problems could include: emphasizing and funding impact and  adaptation studies; providing extra funds for in-country technical assistance;  ensuring that studies focus on the most important economic sectors; improving  communication between scientists, policy makers and stakeholders; identifying  win-win adaptation options that will have both short and long-term effects; and  initiating specific adaptation studies.

In the ensuing discussion, ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA highlighted the role of the media  in building support for climate change adaptation measures at the grassroots  level, noting that policy makers will often respond to public pressure. ZIMBABWE  noted that communications and dialogue between policy makers and scientists  needed to be two-directional. UGANDA endorsed the need for awareness raising.

Replying to a question from FINLAND relating to the fact that some  methodological guidelines for adaptation assessments are now over a decade old,  Feenstra said methodologies should continue to be developed, but that this  should not be used as a reason to delay adaptation assessments. Responding to a  question from the PHILIPPINES concerning the role of the private sector in  adaptation studies, Feenstra noted that the private sector can play a part, but  much work is needed to raise its understanding and awareness of climate change.

On 9 March, Brett Orlando, Climate Change Programme Officer at the IUCN (World  Conservation Union) presented recommendations for action in the areas of:  information gathering; capacity building; policy/implementation; and finance,  technology transfer, and insurance. Specific actions recommended included:  development of an analytical framework for risk assessment by the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), development of tools and  guidelines at the national level in developing countries by the GEF and its  partners; joint action to harness synergies with other conventions; and the  mobilization of financial and technical development assistance by the World  Bank, UNEP and UNDP to support implementation of the priority actions.

### ADVERSE EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON WATER RESOURCES

On 10 March, Bubu Jallow,  Principal Meteorologist, Department of Water Resources for the Gambia, outlined  the impacts of climate change on: the hydrological system; extreme events;  freshwater systems; inputs into water bodies; water supply and demand; and water  resources infrastructure and management. He noted that, while precipitation is  expected to increase at the global level, it will be unequally distributed, with  increases in high latitude regions and decreases at lower latitudes, and with  both impacts and adaptive capacity varying across nations. He then outlined  actions for adaptation, including:increasing storage capacity for water; restoring and rehabilitating wetlands to reduce flooding; strengthening institutional capacity to undertake assessment and  adaptation; updating and developing meteorological and hydrological networks and  preserving existing databases; legislating to regulate the abstraction of surface and river water for  irrigation; introducing crops and varieties suited to water stress, and improving  management and efficiency of irrigation; cooperating at the regional and river basin level; and, improving modeling, planning tools and early warning systems.

During the ensuing discussion, INDIA questioned the applicability of legislative  measures to control abstraction from rivers in cases where water volumes  fluctuate widely. SWITZERLAND noted that precipitation in central Europe in  winter has increased by 40%, with more intense rainfall rather than more days of  precipitation, which has resulted in flooding. The UK called for the  identification of the additional elements of water stress arising from climate  change. ZIMBABWE noted the need for regional down-scaling of models to aid in  assessing vulnerability and adaptation options. FINLAND said high resolution  climate models are not yet well developed. The US commented that the discussion  on the impacts of climate change on water resource needs to include implications  for power production. Responding to a question from NIGERIA, Jallow underscored  that, while climate change is not the only factor negatively affecting water  resources, it will exacerbate existing problems.

### ADVERSE EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON HUMAN HEALTH

On 10 March, Roberto  Bertollini, Director, Rome Division of the World Health Organization's European  Center for Environment and Health, presented an overview of the possible adverse  effects of climate change on human health. He noted that possible adverse  effects could result from changes to the frequency and intensity of extreme  weather events, as well as from disturbances to ecological systems, which could  bring about, inter alia: changes in the geographic range of vector-borne  diseases; droughts; floods; and population displacement resulting from sea-level  rise.

Regarding vulnerability assessments, he suggested that: monitoring and  assessments need to take an integrated approach; national assessments of  climate-induced human health impacts should constitute an important part of FCCC  national communications; information-exchange networks should be developed and  strengthened; and relevant research should be promoted, with particular emphasis  on empirical studies. He emphasized the importance of adequate capacity for  conducting vulnerability assessments that require multisectoral collaboration,  data availability and comparability, trained personnel, and necessary equipment.  On the issue of adaptation, he noted that low-cost adaptation options include:  interagency cooperation; reduction of social vulnerability; public education;  early warning and epidemic forecasting; support for infectious disease control;  and integrated environmental management.

In the subsequent discussion, several delegates drew attention to recent reports  of a spread of diseases such as malaria and cholera to new areas, and suggested  that this may relate to climate change. Bertollini noted that traditional public  health measures can be effective in responding to these diseases, and that  public health infrastructure and systems need to be in a position to address  such problems effectively. He noted that climate change may exacerbate or spread  certain health risks, and that this would require investment in the health  system.

In response to a number of delegates' comments on raising awareness of the  adverse effects of climate change on health, Bertollini agreed on the need for  awareness raising, while noting that it is difficult to encourage policy makers  to take measures in response to scenarios for the year 2050. The NETHERLANDS  supported awareness-raising both among the public and policy makers. The  EUROPEAN COMMISSION underscored the potential role of the private sector in  terms of adaptation. Mohammed Sanusi Barkindo (Nigeria), co-chair of the  workshop session, stated that 'health is wealth,' and noted the correlation  between health spending and health indicators.

### ADVERSE EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON COASTAL ZONES

On 10 March, Mahendra Kumar,  International Negotiations Officer for the South Pacific Regional Environment  Programme (SPREP), emphasized that the impacts of climate change in coastal  zones range from issues specific to coasts to more broadly manifested impacts  related to water supply, food production, and human health. He said responses  and adaptation need to be multi-sectoral, process oriented, linked to integrated  coastal zone management and incorporated into long-term national development  planning. Specific responses identified in the national communications of Small  Island Developing States (SIDS) involved, inter alia, coastal zone planning,  modeling of storm surges, engineering solutions, bans on sand extraction,  replanting of littoral vegetation, and coping strategies, including education  and relocation. He called for technology transfer in the form of flows of  knowledge, experience and adaptation equipment, and for capacity building to  raise awareness, especially in relation to coastal processes. He noted the  importance of equity and social considerations and said that, while more  adaptation measures can be implemented as further knowledge becomes available,  immediate action should be taken.

In the subsequent discussion, ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA noted that insurance companies  are beginning to withdraw coverage and increase rates for some coastal areas,  which could impede economic growth, particularly in the tourism industry. He  said premiums can be linked to adaptation on the part of the property owner, and  called for dialogue between governments and insurance companies. MAURITIUS  called for identification of common issues relating to vulnerability and  adaptation contained in SIDS' national communications that could be used in  developing adaptation strategies. Responding to JAMAICA regarding the  appropriate level at which to approach adaptation, Kumar said regional  cooperation is useful, as specific measures that can be modified at a low cost  could be identified and replicated elsewhere.

### SPECIFIC NEEDS AND SPECIAL SITUATIONS OF THE LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES

On 10  March, Mamadou Honadia, Coordinator, National Council for Environmental  Management, Burkina Faso, outlined the specific needs and special situations of  the LDCs. He described the shared characteristics of LDCs in terms of the poor  state of their economies and their health, education and industrial sectors, and  observed that 33 of the 54 LDCs are African countries, while 15 are Asian or  SIDS.

He stated that measures should be taken and assistance received from developed  countries in the areas of technology transfer, financing, and actions related to  socio-economic risk. Regarding technology transfer, he said measures and  assistance could be applied in the areas of agriculture, water resources,  integrated management of coastal zones, the energy sector, and the  rehabilitation of arid and semi-arid zones affected by drought and  desertification. Regarding financing, he urged support for a number of measures  and actions, including, inter alia: adaptation measures in the agriculture  sector; a plan of action to combat epidemics; early warning systems for  disasters; local development plans to combat desertification; sustainable  management of forests through reforestation programmes; studies and integrated  projects for coastal zone management; resettlement of industrial facilities and  other infrastructure affected by climate change; public awareness campaigns; and  both North-South and South-South capacity building undertaken through workshops,  training and joint activities.

He also supported financing for vulnerability and adaptation assessments and  studies related to adverse effects of climate change. In relation to socio- economic risks, he proposed the creation and financing of early warning systems  at a sub-regional scale, the establishment of rapid intervention mechanisms, and  the restoration of areas affected by climate change. He concluded by calling for  LDCs to be given priority in terms of Article 4.8 and 4.9 and for a decision at  COP-6 on an urgent plan to implement Article 4.9. He cautioned that we should  not wait for completion of all national communications before taking action.

In the discussion that followed, UNSIDS supported the proposal to give urgent  attention to implementing actions for LDCs. NIGERIA and ZIMBABWE expressed  concern about an approach that might divide the needs of LDCs and other  developing countries, and supported considering the needs of all developing  countries together. In response, Honadia noted that LDCs fit within the  framework of Article 4.8, but that their special needs are also recognized under  Article 4.9.

### ACTIONS RELATED TO FUNDING, INSURANCE AND TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER TO MEET THE NEEDS  OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

On 10 and 11 March, participants heard four  presentations and engaged in discussion on actions related to funding, insurance  and the transfer of technology to meet the specific needs and circumstances of  developing countries arising from the adverse effect of climate change.

Presentations: Michael Cooper, CGU Insurance Group, emphasized that insurance is  a commercial enterprise. He noted the large losses incurred recently by  insurance companies due to storms, cyclones and hurricanes, and said investments  in preparedness, mitigation and prevention are economically efficient. He noted  that large and growing cities in coastal areas are considered as emerging risks  by the insurance industry. He said the industry can offer advice on risk  management and loss prevention in developing countries, drawing on its own  research. He also stressed the role of insurers and reinsurers in: raising  public awareness; insisting on sensible development of land and on more  resistant designs and standards; encouraging economic development that takes  account of climate change; and providing insurance for acceptable risks.

Hiro Kazuno, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan, presented examples of  Australia, Japan and the US supporting adaptation measures. He discussed a  number of projects, including those involving monitoring, training and early  warning systems. Based on evidence from these examples, he concluded that: the  adverse effects of climate change are threatening people's livelihoods in  vulnerable areas; developed countries have been providing assistance to  vulnerable countries, as envisaged under Article 4.8 and 4.9; greater  coordination of adaptation assistance among developed countries would make such  assistance more effective; and assistance for adaptation activities could be  strengthened if more information was sought by and provided to developed  countries regarding vulnerable countries' needs and concerns.

Espen Rønneberg, Inter-Regional Advisor for Small Island Developing States,  Water, Natural Resources and SIDS Branch of the UN Division for Sustainable  Development of DESA (UNSIDS), made a presentation on the needs of SIDS,  particularly in relation to adaptation options. He suggested that the  international community could assist SIDS with adaptation in the following three  areas:actions aimed at making development more sustainable in light of climate  change by building an adaptation component into development projects; actions specifically oriented to adapt to the effects of climate change,  including coastal zone protection, agricultural innovations and public education  and awareness programmes; and, actions aimed at capacity building.

He noted that the issue of insurance needed to be addressed to ensure the long- term viability of the sustainable development process for SIDS. He also stated  that UNSIDS should become a central hub for information, assistance, cooperation  and project facilitation. Regarding national communications, he emphasized that  these contain valuable information on vulnerability and adaptation, which, once  analyzed, should form the basis for priority-setting, future activities and  project development. He also stated that information on experiences and lessons  learned from relevant past and ongoing programmes and projects would be useful.

Youba Sokona said funding for adaptation in developing countries should be  integrated within existing development programmes. He emphasized the need to  explicitly incorporate funding for adaptation in ongoing programmes, including  those existing under environmental conventions, as well as in development aid  programmes and National Environmental Action Plans. Noting the lack of basic  infrastructure in developing countries, he stated that adaptation needs to be  taken into account when infrastructure is planned. He called for a high-level  policy dialogue on climate change that engages officials from all relevant  government ministries and departments. Such a dialogue would aim at facilitating  a more efficient use of resources by identifying areas where synergies exist.

Discussion: In the ensuing discussion on these presentations, the WHO drew  attention to national disaster funds that are collected through a surcharge on  individual insurance policies and collected in the case of disaster. The UK  asked whether such a model for insurance collection could work at the regional  level, and Cooper responded that a regional approach could work where small- scale models would not. GREENPEACE asked whether mechanisms exist to collect  funds in LDCs, where there are few individual insurance policies. Michael Cooper  suggested that other options, including taxation, could be explored.

IUCN noted that the insurance industry has a large stake in whether the  international community can succeed in addressing the adverse effects of climate  change, and asked whether insurance companies might consider investing resources  as a pre-emptive strategy to help prevent such adverse effects. In response,  Cooper stressed that industry investments would have to demonstrate some profit- making potential. He also noted that insurance companies currently invest in  research in order to better understand issues of risk and risk reduction.

A number of delegates raised the issue of how adaptation measures can be  integrated into national strategies for sustainable development. Youba Sokona  stated that there are different methods and various levels for applying  integration. Bo Kjellen (Sweden), co-chair of this session, noted that  integration can help avoid creating another layer of bureaucracy specific to  climate change.

On integrating adaptation criteria at the programme/project level, SPREP  welcomed the expansion and modification of existing programmes to take into  account new, emerging and actual needs. The PHILIPPINES cautioned against  reclassifying projects without prior climate change vulnerability assessment and  agreed processes. NIGERIA said reclassification would create problems for  assessment. FRANCE supported revisiting existing projects and programmes, and  asked whether a further step could be taken in the progress, suggesting regional  or sectoral workshops on revisiting. Youba Sokona called for active discussion  and dialogue on adaptation issues outside the climate change community.

## PANEL DISCUSSION

On 11 March, participants convened for a panel discussion to identify and  reflect on the key issues and initial actions raised at this workshop. The panel  consisted of delegates representing Bangladesh, Jamaica, the Netherlands, New  Zealand, Uganda, and the European Commission.

Panel presentations: BANGLADESH noted the adverse effects from climate change  affecting his country, including flooding, impacts on agricultural production,  malnutrition, and the risk of higher incidences of some diseases. He noted that  his country's greenhouse gas emissions are negligible in global terms. He raised  the need for capacity building for vulnerability and adaptation assessments. He  called for more funding for adaptation assessments and for implementation. He  highlighted the needs of LDCs and the importance of technology transfer, and  identified education, training and monitoring as key areas requiring attention.

JAMAICA supported the establishment of regional climate centers that could have  a mandate to: strengthen monitoring and analysis of climate change and sea-level  rise; identify areas of vulnerability; help develop integrated management and  planning frameworks for response measures; enhance institutional strengthening  and human resource development; and identify and evaluate policy options that  could be integrated into the national agenda. He noted that participants had  identified education and awareness raising as important areas for taking action.  He suggested that education and awareness raising activities could be aimed at  three different groups: policy makers, students/tutors, and the public. He said  this workshop had also highlighted the need to establish and improve effective  early warning systems.

The NETHERLANDS noted some participants' view that it is important for all  developing countries, including LDCs, to be producing their national  communications, as the vulnerability assessment and adaptation sections will be  of value to all developing countries in identifying adaptation options. He drew  attention to participants' calls for further linkages and cooperation with other  conventions, including the desertification and biodiversity conventions. He said  the period following a disaster should be used as a window of opportunity to  promote the integration of climate change policies into reconstruction projects  and to raise awareness.

NEW ZEALAND emphasized participants' reference to the information gap, noting  that the lack of information and data exists at many levels. He said both Annex  I and non-Annex I Parties need to consider carefully what is required to address  these gaps, although he noted that the precise form of the information is less  important at this stage than starting the process itself, as 'the best should  not be the enemy of the good.' Emphasizing the concept of integration as another  key issue, he said some participants had noted that all relevant government  agencies should be involved in what is a cross-sectoral issue. He said  governments need to identify the best means of facilitating communications,  mediation and institution building, and noted that the idea of creating national  teams that operate within government and have external outreach was worth  exploring. He stated that climate change is an iterative process, and that the  appropriate policies and solutions will differ depending on circumstances,  meaning a pragmatic approach is necessary.

UGANDA highlighted three key issues: capacity building; poverty reduction; and  the need to develop an action programme for adaptation. He emphasized the need  for institutional capacity building, and stressed the importance of establishing  links to programmes and agencies in areas considered national priorities, such  as poverty reduction, education and health. He also stressed the need for  poverty alleviation and climate change impact assessment in key sectors.

The EUROPEAN COMMISSION highlighted the needs of populations in LDCs and those  in poverty in low and middle income countries, as these people will suffer most  from the adverse impacts of climate change. He advocated mainstreaming the  climate change agenda into development programmes and projects. He further  pointed to the urgency of setting priorities in light of scarce resources, in  particular scarce human resources.

Discussion: In the ensuing discussion, many delegates observed that a number of  specific ideas and proposals for initial actions had been identified during this  workshop. Several delegates endorsed the proposal for regional climate centers.  UNSIDS supported using existing institutions to establish regional climate  centers. NIGERIA expressed reservations about creating centers that could be  mono-sectoral in scope, and said regional centers that addressed a number of  related areas would be preferable. SPREP said that empowering existing regional  centers to take on these activities would ensure that the initiative was multi- sectoral. In response to the comments on regional centers, JAMAICA stressed that  the aim was not to create new institutions but to establish this initiative  within existing institutions.

ZIMBABWE said initial actions would cover impact assessments, vulnerability  assessment, evaluation of adaptation options and adaptation project  implementation. She noted that external and internal interventions would be  necessary in terms of these initial actions. External interventions would relate  to capacity building, funding, and technology transfer, with a focus on project  implementation and insurance. Internal interventions would relate to developing  political will, awareness raising, and integration of climate change in  development planning.

MAURITIUS highlighted the important assistance that developed countries can  provide developing countries in terms of capacity building for both human  resources and equipment. He said capacity building in terms of human resources  should focus on training those involved in climate change negotiations, relevant  science and research, and operational aspects at the national level. INDIA noted  that, although the transfer of technology was an important tool in efforts to  address climate change, the lessons and solutions to be found in traditional  knowledge systems should not be overlooked. CANADA urged identification of  priorities for action as well as continuation of information-gathering, noting  that 'action and learning are two sides of the same coin and we have to keep  moving on both.' On insurance, JAMAICA said governments will have to play a lead role and should  have insurance coverage in order to attract inward investment. He stated that,  if developed countries had implemented their FCCC targets, adaptation would not  be such an urgent issue now.

## CLOSING PLENARY

On 11 March, Chair Dovland noted that the workshop had covered comprehensively  the issues it had been mandated to consider, including funding, insurance and  the transfer of technology.

Reflecting on the key issues raised during the workshop, he drew attention to  delegates' comments on the need for capacity building, and said the regional  approach identified by participants would be reflected in his report. On the  issue of information gaps, he stated that the Secretariat should identify what  information is available to it from national communications and other sources on  vulnerability and adaptation assessments. This could be supplemented by further  information, which may or may not be provided through national communications.  He noted that the water, health and food sectors had been identified as being  particularly important in terms of adaptation.

He observed that cross-cutting issues included the integration of adaptation  issues into development plans. He also noted the need for better coordination  between ministries and agencies. Another key issue identified by participants  was the need for adequate funding. He also noted the discussion on the needs of  LDCs, as well as the importance of awareness raising. He then drew attention to  participants' views on insurance, and said this was an issue that should be  explored further.

UNSIDS said it would be useful to develop a list of concrete initiatives being  conducted by insurance companies relating to climate change mitigation. WHO said  insurance companies should be invited to any future workshop on this issue to  help develop specific measures in this area. QATAR noted the need for more  information on adverse effects to clear up some of the existing uncertainties.  MAURITIUS stressed the urgency of acting on Article 4.9. BRAZIL observed that,  although information gaps need to be filled, vulnerability and adaptation  assessment are not mandatory in non-Annex I communications, meaning that  national communications will not necessarily be the appropriate means to fill  this gap.

In response, Chair Dovland said that this is one of several channels that exist  to fill the information gaps. He said the report from this workshop would  reflect the ideas raised by participants and contribute to discussions at SB-12.  He said he believed that this workshop had been a productive exercise and, after  thanking participants, declared the meeting closed at 2:30pm.

# REPORT OF THE WORKSHOP ON THE IMPACT OF IMPLEMENTATION OF RESPONSE MEASURES

SBSTA Chair Harald Dovland (Norway) opened the meeting on 13 March and noted  that this workshop was the result of a decision at the Fifth Conference of the  Parties to the FCCC (COP-5). He said the workshop would consider methodological  approaches and necessary actions under the FCCC relating to the impact of  implementation of response measures on, inter alia, terms of trade,  international capital flows and developmental efforts, in accordance with FCCC  Article 4.8 and 4.9 and in the light of matters related to Protocol Article 3.14  (adverse effects). He noted that issues to be addressed at this workshop would  include the nature, content and sources of information needed in relation to the  impact of response measures, procedures and modalities for the provision of  information, and what actions are needed, including those relating to funding,  insurance and the transfer of technology. He stated that the outcome of this  workshop will be a report from the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies that lists  the main points and issues raised by participants. The report will provide an  input into discussions at the twelfth and thirteenth meetings of the subsidiary  bodies (SB-12 and SB-13), which will lead to a decision at COP-6.

## OVERVIEW OF THE IMPACT OF IMPLEMENTATION OF RESPONSE MEASURES

Thomas Rutherford, Associate Professor, Department of Economics of the  University of Colorado, provided on overview of the economic impact of the  implementation of response measures from a modeler's perspective. He underscored  the usefulness of collaborative efforts within the modeling community. He  presented the Energy Modeling Forum 18 (EMF 18) programme on international trade  dimensions of climate policies, which brings together ten modeling programmes  and focuses on: terms of trade effects and the transfer of impacts across  countries; leakage rates and their determinants; impacts on developing  countries; oil price responses; and decomposition methodologies. He also  introduced the Global Trade Analysis Programme (GTAP), a database that collates  international economic production and trade statistics to facilitate modeling  and policy analysis. He then presented indicative outcomes from his work within  the EMF and GTAP framework, focusing on implications of the implementation of  the Kyoto Protocol.

He outlined international trade effects, including a reduction of international  oil and coal prices and a migration of energy intensive production to non-Annex  B (developing) country Parties. He said the economic impacts of response  measures would be negative on OECD countries and could be extremely negative on  oil producing developing countries, while other developing countries could  experience either positive and/or negative effects. He said China and India  would benefit from response measures, and Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) and  Annex B (developed country Party) trade may provide limited welfare gains to  developing countries.

Chair Dovland then invited comments and questions from the floor. Some delegates  noted the complexity of these models, while several suggested additional  assumptions or noted specific inadequacies. SWEDEN underscored the importance of  factoring in renewable energy sources in modeling. CANADA questioned whether  existing models fully capture the evolution of new, less carbon-intensive  technologies. The UK and UNSIDS pointed to the inaccuracy of models based on the  assumption of a uniform carbon tax, as many countries plan to implement multiple  policies and measures to reduce emissions. Rutherford agreed that additional  assumptions could be useful, but noted limitations inherent in economic  equilibrium models. SOUTH AFRICA supported the need to develop modeling  activities and improve data collection in developing countries. In response to a  question from BOLIVIA, Rutherford said Annex B countries may place restrictions  on imports of energy-intensive products from non-Annex B countries.

## SESSIONS ON THE IMPACT OF IMPLEMENTATION OF RESPONSE MEASURES

Following the opening of the workshop and overview of the impact of  implementation of response measures, sessions were held during 13 and 14 March  to review the impact of response measures on: terms of trade and international  capital flows; developmental effects; and the specific needs and special  situation of LDCs. In addition, a session was convened to consider what actions  are necessary as a result of these impacts, including actions relating to  funding, insurance and the transfer of technology. The following section  outlines the presentations and discussions that took place during these  sessions.

## IMPACT OF RESPONSE MEASURES ON TERMS OF TRADE AND INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL FLOW

### Oil markets and oil production revenues:

Knut H. Alfsen, Director of the Center  for International Climate and Environmental Research (CICERO), made a  presentation on the Kyoto Protocol and its impact on global oil markets and  production revenues up to 2020. He noted that his assessment used the CLIMOX  model, which covers 13 sectors in 12 regions. He said this model has a number of  advantages, as it includes fugitive methane emissions, explicitly addresses the  issue of oil supply, including non-conventional oil, and accounts for likely  regional variations in policy. Using this model, he presented three scenarios  based on: business-as-usual; prolonging the Protocol to 2020; and regulating the  greenhouse gas emissions of all countries.

He said the CLIMOX model suggests that the establishment of a climate regime  will result in a decline in revenue from oil, gas and coal production when  compared to the business-as-usual scenario. However, distribution of these  losses among regions is expected to vary according to the fuel in question. He  noted that some oil producing countries are heavily dependent on revenue from  oil, while gas and coal producers are generally less reliant on these products  for their incomes. In addition, he concluded that the distribution of revenue  losses will be affected by the nature and coverage of the Protocol and the type  of policy instrument used to reach emission targets.

In the subsequent discussion, SAUDI ARABIA said there seemed to be agreement  that the Protocol will have an impact on fossil fuel exporters, although there  might be divergence over the extent of this impact. The US and UK stated that  the losses noted in this study did not mean actual losses in overall revenue  from the baseline year, as revenues would actually increase considerably under  all three scenarios. Rather, it was the rate of revenue increase that differed  under each scenario. AUSTRALIA suggested that losses in potential oil revenue  could result in growth prospects in other areas that could compensate for any  hypothetical loss predicted under these models. OPEC noted that many oil  exporting countries are also gas exporting countries, meaning the impact on  these economies would be even greater.

A number of delegates raised issues relating to the assumptions and elements  included in the CLIMOX model and scenarios used. In response to GREENPEACE on  whether renewable energy factors were included in this model, Knut Alfsen said  it was not explicitly included, but that energy efficiency considerations were  accounted for. In addition, he noted that climate policy is just one of many  factors affecting oil revenue.

###     Impacts of Annex B policies on Non-Annex B Parties:

John Reilly, Associate  Director for Research of the Joint Programme on the Science and Policy of Global  Change at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, outlined five ways that  Annex B response measures may impact on non-Annex B countries:terms of trade effects, especially effects due to changes in the prices of  oil, gas and coal; impacts on the volume of trade, as lower economic growth in Annex B  countries translates into less demand for non-Annex B products; migration of energy-intensive production from Annex B to non-Annex B  countries; economic effects of payments related to the CDM; and migration of capital and labor.

He recommended: improving estimates of the relationship between the carbon price  and the impact on non-Annex B countries based on advice from a panel of experts;  improving modeling by using observed Annex B carbon prices as a basis for  estimating the impact on non-Annex B countries; and converting various Annex B  policies into a 'carbon price equivalent.' In the ensuing discussion, SAUDI ARABIA and NIGERIA cautioned that energy  intensive industry may not necessarily relocate to oil exporting countries.  NIGERIA stated that consumer and ethical values may create trade barriers  between high and low energy intensive countries. The UK questioned the  assumption that implementing climate change policies in Annex B Parties  necessarily leads to reduced economic growth.

###     Analytical frameworks/models and sustainable development:

Tariq Banuri, Senior  Research Director, Tellus Institute, discussed climate change models and  policies from a broader sustainable development perspective. He said a lesson  from using earlier frameworks/models is that they need to be participatory at  both the international and national level, and include an effective and  inclusive policy process. He said it may be necessary to rework current models  or develop complementary models. Noting the global income inequity, he also  addressed the issue of economic rents and the need for their more equitable  distribution.

In the ensuing discussion, AUSTRALIA expressed doubt that a reconstruction  effort of current climate change models was necessary. SAUDI ARABIA noted the  vulnerability of developing countries that are heavily dependent on the export  of fossil fuels. He said the FCCC recognizes that no country should bear a  disproportionate share of the burden of the impacts of climate change. In  response to a question from BOLIVIA on the CDM, Banuri said it could provide  incentives for investment in developing countries, but that much work remained  to ensure that it contributed to sustainable development.

### IMPACT OF RESPONSE MEASURES ON DEVELOPMENTAL EFFORTS

On 14 March, Vanida  Govender, Corporate Environmental Manager at ESKOM, a South African government- owned power utility, made a presentation on how response measures to climate  change in Annex I countries could affect the international coal market and coal  exporting developing countries. She emphasized that small impacts on the price  of fossil fuels would have a major impact on exporters, with implications for  welfare and development prospects for people in poverty. She outlined a  sequential approach to minimizing the negative impact of response measures based  on both short-term and long-term policy measures. She said action in the short  term should involve: modeling of response measure impacts, with peer review of  the models by Party representatives; technical review of response measures  described in national Annex I communications; and research and development to  explore a range of compensation measures. Action in the long term should  involve: mitigation measures in Annex I countries to eliminate negative impacts  in non-Annex I countries; technology transfer linked to restructuring of fossil  fuel dependent economies; technology transfer linked to the CDM and an  adaptation fund; and measures to ensure that efficient technologies are  installed when energy intensive industry relocates.

During the ensuing discussion, the UK highlighted the potential of the FCCC to  stimulate the development of renewable energy sources to provide further  electrification in developing countries. Vanida Govender underscored the need  for a strong economy to support investment in electrification through emerging  technologies. SAUDI ARABIA called for immediate action to create structures for  dealing with impacts of response measures, with compensation occurring after the  extent of impact has been proved. JAPAN noted that compensation is not mentioned  in the FCCC and the Kyoto Protocol. The UAE stated that compensation exists as a  general principle of international law. Vanida Govender emphasized the need for  research as a basis for policy development on compensation.

### SPECIFIC NEEDS AND SPECIAL SITUATIONS OF THE LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES

On 14  March, Tariq Banuri, Senior Research Director, Tellus Institute, discussed  climate change policy within the framework of sustainable development. Noting  that 40% of the world's population lives in poverty, he said the challenge is to  achieve development in the context of reducing global carbon emissions.

He outlined the concept of 'sustainable livelihoods,' which considers  development objectives in terms of identifying vulnerabilities and establishing  sufficient capacities in developing countries. He said the capacity for  sustainable development is determined by the availability of various types of  capital, including financial, technological, ecological, social, institutional,  cultural and climate capital. He noted that climate is a form of capital that is  shrinking on a global level. However, developing institutional capital can help  create the necessary technological and financial capital to achieve sustainable  development.

He said climate-related actions to promote sustainable development should  include: a focus on the 'sustainable livelihoods' approach; a transition to  renewable forms of energy; capacity building for project certification,  monitoring and preparation, and self-protection, research and policy making; a  gradualist rather than 'sudden change' approach; and the development of national  adaptation funds.

Philip Gwage, Assistant Commissioner, Applied Meteorology and Data Processing,  Ministry of Land, Water and Environment of Uganda, considered the impacts of  response measures on LDCs. He said LDCs were particularly vulnerable to climate  change and its response measures, given their economic fragility and high levels  of poverty. He said response measures may result in: declining exports from LDCs  to developed countries; increasing prices of essential goods in LDCs, especially  if oil prices are high; an increasing debt burden; and decreasing development  assistance, which may not be offset by foreign direct investment, as investment  conditions are often less attractive in LDCs than in other developing countries.  He called for: studies specifically relating to the impact of climate change and  response measures on LDCs; and elimination of market imperfections relating to  oil and other commodities.

In the ensuing discussion, several countries noted the adverse impact of high  energy prices on LDCs. The NETHERLANDS said he understood that the impact of  response measures on non-annex I energy importers would be positive or neutral  overall. JAPAN observed that oil prices have been rising regardless of FCCC- related measures. He noted the adverse impact of oil price rises on LDCs, and  asked who is gaining from these increases. Bo Kjellen (Sweden), who chaired this  session, noted that commodity prices have a history of price fluctuations. SAUDI  ARABIA noted market distortions, and said tax made up 80% of the final price of  oil in some OECD countries. He said all developing countries will be affected by  climate change or response measures.

UNSIDS supported allowing only renewable energy within the CDM. IRAN said  renewable energy sources have only a limited capacity to compensate for  conventional sources. In response, Banuri said there must be a shift in the long  term to renewable sources. Replying to a question from BURKINA FASO on  compensation, Banuri said he did not believe that large financial transfers  provided long-term benefits. He stressed the need for investment in capacity  rather than compensation. FRANCE called for more work on the transportation  sector, as it is critical in terms of energy use.

### CONSIDERATION OF ACTIONS NECESSARY

On 14 March, delegates considered what  actions are necessary, including those relating to funding, insurance and the  transfer of technology, with regards to the impact of implementation of response  measures. Participants heard four presentations and engaged in discussion on  this issue.

###     Impact of climate change measures on OPEC:

Faten Alawadhi, Downstream Oil  Industry Analyst, Energy Studies Department, OPEC, discussed the impact of  response measures on OPEC. She noted that studies on the impacts of Protocol  implementation show reductions in revenues for oil exporting developing  countries of 10-45%, although impacts on natural gas revenues are less clear.  She supported parallel discussions aimed at: reaching a consensus on the extent  of losses through more assessment and modeling work; and exploring how Annex B  commitments to minimize the impact of their mitigation policies can be  fulfilled. She suggested actions by Annex B Parties, including, inter alia:  removing distortions in Annex B energy markets and restructuring existing energy  taxes to reflect carbon content of fuels; assisting in economic diversification;  and providing funding and transferring technology to support projects related to  CO2 storage, reduction of gas flaring and venting, and energy efficiency. She  called for all GHGs to be included in Annex B Parties' abatement policies.

###     Impact of response measures on the coal industry:

Ron Knapp, Chief Executive of  the World Coal Institute, outlined key aspects of the international coal market,  noting the rise in consumption in developing countries. He emphasized that both  coal producer and consumer countries will be adversely affected by response  measures, but that effects will be unevenly distributed. He said the objective  of the Kyoto Protocol is to reduce GHGs, not carbon intensity, and called for:  effective market solutions, including the use of voluntary measures and the  Kyoto mechanisms; technological development in response to market circumstances;  and the promotion of clean coal technology.

###     Macro and micro issues in relation to impacts and actions:

Jonathan Pershing,  Head of the Energy and Environment Division, International Energy Agency,  reviewed macro and micro analyses of the impacts of response measures, with  particular emphasis on the energy sector. He concluded that, in spite of some  shortcomings, such models can offer insights on specific policy options. He  presented a framework for analyzing individual policies and their impacts, and  applied it to an EU voluntary agreement on CO2 reductions in the transport  sector. He concluded that, in this example, the adverse effects were negligible  and there were ancillary policy benefits. In looking at these models and  approaches, he said it is difficult to evaluate the impacts and separate climate  policy consequences from other factors. He also suggested that near-term impacts  are likely to be relatively minor, but that this may not apply in the longer  term.

###     Methodological approaches and necessary action:

Thomas Rutherford, Associate  Professor, Department of Economics of the University of Colorado, highlighted  how disaggregation of data affects results and presented a model showing impacts  of response measures by Annex I countries on Saudi Arabia. He noted that, when  oil exporting countries are considered individually, the adverse impacts appear  greater than when the countries are clustered within regions. He said impacts of  response measures are heterogeneous across non-Annex I countries, and more  developing country specific data is needed. On response measures, he observed  that replacing the existing mix of taxes with a targeted carbon tax could  decrease costs both to Annex I countries and oil exporters. He also recommended  action focusing on diversification and a move to greater production of non- energy goods in countries dependent on oil exports.

###     Discussion:

In the ensuing discussion, JAPAN suggested that oil producers take  measures now to diversify their economic structures. Faten Alawadhi noted that a  number of barriers to diversification existed, while Pershing said the  investment climate is not always conducive for diversification. The US called  for modeling of potential cartels and agreed reduction cut-backs by oil  producers. IRAN supported concrete action to, inter alia: enhance research and  development related to energy efficiency, the use of natural gas, and advanced  fossil fuel technologies; diversify the economies of fossil fuel producing  developing countries through facilitating access to markets and preferential  treatment; transfer technology across a number of sectors; and support training  programmes and capacity building. ZIMBABWE said some action should be taken  despite current uncertainties, including further research and development on:  reduction of emissions without reducing consumption; clean coal;  diversification; and win-win actions. SWEDEN supported considering the  suggestions by Iran and Zimbabwe and involving developing countries in research  and development efforts. The US said careful analysis of impacts in developing  countries of climate change policies in Annex I countries since the FCCC entered  into force constitutes appropriate action prior to consideration of future  policies and measures. SAUDI ARABIA called for action as well as research. QATAR  noted that oil is a commodity that will be depleted and said revenues should be  strategically invested to ensure future welfare. AUSTRALIA stressed the  limitations of current models and need for inclusion of further elements, such  as sinks and all GHGs.

## PANEL DISCUSSION

On 15 March, participants convened for a panel discussion to identify and  reflect on the key issues and initial actions raised at this workshop. The panel  consisted of delegates representing Bolivia, Canada, Japan, Nigeria, Saudi  Arabia and the UK.

Panel presentations: BOLIVIA underscored the need for progressing sustainable  development within the FCCC framework. He called for capacity building for  developing country governments in the context of the new, deregulated economy,  especially in the oil and gas sectors. He noted the information and research and  development gap in developing countries, and suggested building indigenous  research capacity as well as training researchers from developing countries in  developed countries and initiating joint research efforts.

CANADA stated that models provide necessary but not sufficient information for  policy making and constitute one of a number of tools available to policy  makers. He said the uncertainty inherent in models and incompleteness of  datasets presents a key challenge. He identified opportunities for action  despite the uncertainties, calling for: the application of a wide range of  response measures, including the use of the Kyoto mechanisms, enhancing sinks  and considering all six GHGs, to achieve cost effectiveness; and research on the  impacts of policies already implemented as well as improvement of data  collection, particularly in developing countries. He said not enough time had  been spent considering positive ancillary impacts of response measures on  developing countries.

JAPAN stressed the importance of adhering to the terms of references, noting  that the scope of the workshop was impacts under the FCCC. He emphasized the  limitations of modeling, particularly in the light of fluctuations in oil  prices. He highlighted the need to study impacts already experienced since the  FCCC's entry into force, rather than projecting into an uncertain future. He  indicated his willingness to consider Iran's list of proposals for action, but  said Japan cannot accept the idea of compensation. He underscored that oil  producers should take measures now to diversify their economies, in light of  increasing revenues due to high oil prices. He affirmed Japan's commitment to  assisting LDCs.

NIGERIA suggested that, as many non-Annex I Parties have yet to submit national  communications, information abstracted from relevant government ministries could  be provided as an interim measure, as this would facilitate immediate action  relating to the impacts of response measures. He called for action to:introduce a paradigm shift in the scoping and process of modeling that  will, inter alia, include other GHGs, and disaggregate the impact of response  measures on regions and, if possible, countries; develop and promote technologies that could accommodate consumption of  fossil fuels without increasing GHG emissions; expand the global carbon sink; establish institutions and procedures, with active participation by all  Parties, to address issues relating to an adaptation or compensation fund,  linkages with other conventions, and the flexibility mechanisms; build institutional and human resource capacity; and ensure investment into developing countries to promote less carbon  intensive energy, renewable energy, and technology transfer.

SAUDI ARABIA said that, in spite of the uncertainties, all models agree that  there will be negative impacts from response measures on developing countries.  He called on Annex I Parties to: remove subsidies and restructure tax systems to  reflect the amount of GHGs in each fossil fuel; remove existing barriers to more  oil use in the power generation sector; discourage nuclear energy use; encourage  and assist in wider use of CO2 sequestration technologies; establish a  fund/funds to compensate impacted developing countries; and assist impacted  developing countries dependent on fossil fuel exports to diversify their  economies. He said more analysis on impacts is needed, but this should not  prevent the compensation issue from being on the negotiating table. He said no  one is asking for compensation today, only after impacts are proved. He stressed  that, under the FCCC, developing countries cannot accept a disproportionate  burden of the impacts of climate change or response measures.

The UK said discussion at this workshop had identified a number of inadequacies  in the models used, including their assumption of a uniform carbon tax and  failure to account for non-CO2 GHGs. However, he noted unanimity among all  models that, with regard to fossil fuels, demand, production and revenue is  projected to rise. He said this workshop had raised the issue of LDCs and that  the poorest communities are the most vulnerable. He noted potential benefits of  response measures, such as through relocation of industry, and highlighted the  need to consider consumers as well as producers. He noted that participants had  considered what developing countries could do to further their policy  objectives, and said one action was to put aside rent from the recent high  prices and revenues from oil sales for insurance provision or diversification.

Discussion: In the ensuing discussion, the PHILIPPINES said the burden of proof  in terms of documentation of impacts is shifting from Annex I to non-Annex I  countries. The UAE pointed to the information gap in terms of impacts of  response measures and said Annex I countries are obliged to take the lead in  bridging the gap. IRAN commented that the workshop had focused too much on the  recent oil price rise, noting that this is not a permanent phenomenon. Mohammed  Reza Salamat (Iran), who chaired this session, agreed that the current rise  cannot be a major factor when detecting impacts of response measures, while the  UK underscored the difficulty of trying to assess the impacts against severe  market fluctuations.

On modeling, PORTUGAL noted that models are an indicative tool, but cannot prove  anything. Noting the importance of biomass for many LDCs, AUSTRALIA said models  need to take into account all GHGs and sinks. The PHILIPPINES and ANTIGUA AND  BARBUDA called for additional refinement of economic analysis, including other  analytical tools besides modeling.

IRAN welcomed the transfer of technologies to advance diversification, as long  as the technologies are sophisticated and modern. Salamat noted links between  the current workshop and the upcoming workshop on policies and measures. The  NETHERLANDS noted the need for national communications from more non-Annex I  countries, and disagreed with the concept of a fund for compensation. ANTIGUA  AND BARBUDA called for expanded dialogue with the WTO and UNCTAD.

JAMAICA noted that the oil exporting developing countries had presented a strong  case relating to loss of income. He said it would be disappointing if Article  4.8 and 4.9 was not implemented. CANADA said it would be useful to focus on  maximizing the benefits of response measures, particularly in relation to the  world's two billion poor. GREENPEACE noted that it should not be assumed that  relocation of carbon intensive industries would benefit developing countries, as  these countries themselves will take on commitments in the near future. She  supported removal of subsidies on fossil fuels to help renewables, and asked  panelists from Annex B Parties when their countries would remove fossil fuel  subsidies. In response, the UK and CANADA noted their liberalization of energy  markets and renewable energy measures. SAUDI ARABIA said subsidy removal should  also apply to nuclear energy.

## CLOSING PLENARY

On 15 March, Chair Dovland outlined key issues raised during the workshop to be  included in the Chairs' report. He noted participants' comments that models are  important and relevant tools for their work, as well as statements on the need  for a comprehensive modeling approach that would include, inter alia, sinks, all  GHGs and mechanisms. He noted the call for modelers to take into account  specific policies and measures, not simply carbon taxes, and the need to include  developing countries in modeling networks and activities.

On actions needed, he noted statements on the importance of improving data  availability from developed and developing countries from national  communications and various other sources. He said capacity building and  technology transfer issues had been raised. He took note of calls by some  participants for an action-oriented approach to look further into the issue of  diversification, and noted proposals for examination of restructuring with  regard to tax policies and subsidies. He also noted participants' comments on  the need for further consideration and action relating to funding to address  proven impacts of response measures. He said reference to sustainable  development had been made, as had the importance of considering LDCs and the  position of the poorest.

Mohammad Reza Salamat (Iran), who co-chaired the closing plenary, noted  participants' comments on difference in the situations of various developing  countries, and on identifying those developing countries dependent on fossil  fuels, either as producers or consumers. Bo Kjellen (Sweden), who had chaired  earlier workshop sessions, underscored several participants' comments on the  need for close cooperation between the climate convention and other conventions,  particularly the desertification convention.

SAUDI ARABIA said the Chairs' report should note discussion on compensation and  on a comprehensive approach in addressing actions. CANADA and the UK said  modeling should address net rather than gross impacts. JAPAN said the report  should reflect the fact that some issues were raised but may not have been  discussed in-depth or agreed on. UNSIDS suggested that the FCCC Secretariat  investigate and advise on any concerns or issues relating to impacts raised in  non-Annex I communications received so far.

Chair Dovland noted that this workshop had built on and advanced discussion  since the previous workshop in September 1999. He thanked participants and the  Secretariat for their hard work and valuable contributions, and declared the  meeting closed at 1:30pm.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR BEFORE COP-6

### FCCC WORKSHOPS

A workshop on 'Issues related to Articles 5, 7 & 8 of the Kyoto  Protocol' (national systems, adjustments and guidelines) will be held from 14-16  March 2000 in Bonn. A workshop on 'Technology transfer for the Latin America &  the Caribbean region' will be held from 29-31 March 2000 in El Salvador. A  workshop on 'Best practices in policies and measures' will be held from 11-13  April 2000 in Copenhagen. A workshop on 'Non-Annex I communications for the  Latin America & the Caribbean region' will be held from 1-5 May 2000 in Mexico  City. For more information, contact: the FCCC Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815- 1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.de; Internet:  http://www.unfccc.de/sessions/workhops.html

### CTI/INDUSTRY JOINT SEMINAR ON TECHNOLOGY DIFFUSION IN LATIN AMERICA AND THE  CARIBBEAN

This seminar will be held from 27-28 March 2000 in San Salvador, El  Salvador. It will focus on the role of the private sector in the diffusion of  climate friendly technology. For more information contact: Megan Gardiner, CTI  Secretariat at the International Energy Agency; tel: +331-4057-6684; e-mail:  megan.gardiner@iea.org

### SEATTLE SUMMIT ON PROTECTING THE WORLD'S CLIMATE

This meeting will be held from  3-5 April 2000 in Seattle, USA. The summit is being organized by the Climate  Institute in partnership with Climate Solutions. It aims to bring together key  individuals, including leaders in the information and telecommunications  revolutions of the last two decades. For more information, contact: the Climate  Institute; tel: +1-202-547-0104; fax: +1-202-547-0111; Internet:  http://www.climate.org/seattlesummit

### PACIFIC ISLANDS CONFERENCE ON CLIMATE CHANGE, CLIMATE VARIABILITY AND SEA LEVEL  CHANGE

This meeting will be held from 3-7 April 2000 in Rarotonga, Cook  Islands. The meeting is being organized by the South Pacific Regional  Environment Programme (SPREP), in partnership with the National Tidal Facility,  UNDP and GEF through the Pacific Islands Climate Change Assistance Programme.  For more information, contact: SPREP; fax: +685-202-31; e-mail:  kaluwin@sprep.org.ws; Internet: http://www.sprep.org.ws

### CLIMATE POLICY WORKSHOP

FROM KYOTO TO THE HAGUE - EUROPEAN PERSPECTIVES ON  MAKING THE KYOTO PROTOCOL WORK: This workshop will take place from 18-19 April  2000 in Amsterdam, and is being organized by the European Forum on Integrated  Environmental Assessment. The workshop will review scientific information  relevant for the EU and its Member States in preparing for FCCC COP-6 and will  aim to enhance the policy relevance of climate-related research in Europe. For  more information, contact: Albert Faber, RIVM; tel:+31-30-274-3683/3728; fax:  +31-30-274-4435; e-mail: albert.faber@rivm.nl; Internet:  http://www.vu.nl/english/o_o/instituten/IVM/research/efiea/announce.htm

### CONFERENCE ON INNOVATIVE POLICY SOLUTIONS TO GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE

This  Conference will be held from 25-26 April 2000 in Washington DC. It is being co- hosted by the Pew Center on Global Climate Change and the Royal Institute of  International Affairs. The meeting will consider innovative policies currently  being implemented by industrialized country governments and the private sector  to address climate change. For more information, contact: Michelle Pilliod; tel:  +1-202-544-7900; fax: +1-202-544-7922; e-mail: pilliodmp@aol.com; Internet:  http://www.pewclimate.org/forms/innov_conf.html

### 12TH SESSION OF THE FCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES

SB-12 will be held from 12-16 June  2000 in Bonn. It will be preceded by one week of informal meetings, including  workshops. For more information, contact: the FCCC Secretariat; tel: +49-228- 815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.de; Internet:  http://www.unfccc.de/sessions/sessions.html

### INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CLIMATE CHANGE COMMUNICATION

This conference will  be held from 22-24 June 2000 in Kitchener-Waterloo, Ontario, Canada. It will be  hosted by Environment Canada and the University of Waterloo and is intended to  support effective communication as a means of strengthening the climate change  science-policy process. Participants will examine the role of communication in  perceptions and knowledge of climate change, assess the effectiveness of  different tools in raising awareness of climate change, and identify obstacles  to effective communication. For more information contact: Jean Andrey,  Department of Geography, University of Waterloo; tel: +1-519-888-4567 ext. 3629;  e-mail: jandrey@fes.uwaterloo.ca or contact Daniel Scott, Adaptation and Impacts  Research Group, Environment Canada, tel: +1-519-888-4567 ext. 5497; e-mail:  dj2scott@fes.uwaterloo.ca; Internet: http://geognt.uwaterloo.ca/c3confer/

### FCCC 13TH SESSION OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES

SB-13 will be held from 11-15  September 2000. It will be preceded by one week of informal meetings, including  workshops. For more information, contact: the FCCC Secretariat.

### FCCC SIXTH CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES

COP-6 will be held from 13-24 November  2000 in The Hague, the Netherlands. For more information, contact: the FCCC  Secretariat.