---
title: "TECHNICAL WORKSHOP ON MECHANISMS UNDER ARTICLES 6, 12 AND 17 OF THE KYOTO PROTOCOL: 9-15 APRIL 1999"
id: enb1298e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1298e
date: 1999-04-15
abstract: "The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  Technical Workshop on Mechanisms under Articles 6, 12 and 17 of  the Kyoto Protocol was held from 9-15 April 1999 at La Redoute  in Bonn-Bad Godesberg, Germany. The workshop was designed to  advance the discussion on technological and methodological  aspects of Article 6 (joint implementation), Article 12 (clean  development mechanism) and Article 17 (emissions trading) so  that the Conference of the Parties can take decisions on all  three mechanisms at its sixth session. The workshop was attended  by approximately 100 invited participants, which included  experts from Parties and representatives from governments, UN  agencies, and intergovernmental and non-governmental  organizations. Core topics at the workshop included reference  case/baseline methodologies, additionality, verification and  reporting in relation to the clean development mechanism (CDM)  and Article 6 projects. Further issues addressed included the  validation and funding of projects under the CDM and the  adaptation component, and reporting, verification and  accountability issues related to emissions trading. Participants  also exchanged views on capacity building for developing country  Parties."
---

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FCCC AND THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC)  was adopted on 9 May 1992, and was opened for signature at the  UN Conference on Environment and Development in June 1992. The  Convention entered into force on 21 March 1994, 90 days after  receipt of the 50th ratification. It currently has been ratified  by 176 countries.

### COP-1

The first meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the  FCCC (COP-1) took place in Berlin from 28 March - 7 April 1995.  In addition to addressing a number of important issues related  to the future of the Convention, delegates reached agreement on  what many believed to be the central issue before COP-1 -  adequacy of commitments, the 'Berlin Mandate.' The result was to  establish an open-ended Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate  (AGBM) to begin a process toward appropriate action for the  period beyond 2000, including the strengthening of the  commitments of Annex I Parties through the adoption of a  protocol or another legal instrument.

COP-1 also requested the Secretariat to make arrangements for  sessions of the subsidiary bodies on scientific and  technological advice (SBSTA) and implementation (SBI). SBSTA  would serve as the link between the information provided by  competent international bodies, and the policy-oriented needs of  the COP. During the AGBM process, SBSTA addressed several  issues, including the treatment of the IPCC's Second Assessment  Report (SAR). SBI was created to develop recommendations to  assist the COP in the review and assessment of the  implementation of the Convention and in the preparation and  implementation of its decisions. SBI also addressed several key  issues during the AGBM process, such as the national  communications and activities implemented jointly (AIJ).

The Ad Hoc Group on Article 13 (AG13) was set up to consider the  establishment of a multilateral consultative process available  to Parties to resolve questions on implementation. AG13-1, held  from 30-31 October 1995 in Geneva, decided to request Parties,  non-Parties, and intergovernmental and non-governmental  organizations to make written submissions in response to a  questionnaire on a multilateral consultative process (MCP).  Delegates continued their discussion over the course of three  meetings. At their fifth session, they agreed that the MCP  should be advisory rather than supervisory in nature and AG13  should complete its work by COP-4.

Ad Hoc GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE: The AGBM met eight times  between August 1995 and COP-3 in December 1997. During the first  three sessions, delegates focused on analyzing and assessing  possible policies and measures to strengthen the commitments of  Annex I Parties, how Annex I countries might distribute or share  new commitments and whether commitments should take the form of  an amendment or protocol. AGBM-4, which coincided with COP-2 in  Geneva in July 1996, completed its in-depth analysis of the  likely elements of a protocol and States appeared ready to  prepare a negotiating text. At AGBM-5, which met in December  1996, delegates recognized the need to decide whether or not to  allow mechanisms that would provide Annex I Parties with  flexibility in meeting quantified emissions limitation and  reduction objectives (QELROs).

As the protocol was drafted during the sixth and seventh  sessions of the AGBM, in March and August 1997, respectively,  delegates 'streamlined' a framework compilation text by merging  or eliminating some overlapping provisions within the myriad of  proposals. Much of the discussion centered on a proposal from  the EU for a 15% cut in a 'basket' of three greenhouse gases by  the year 2010 compared to 1990 levels. In October 1997, as AGBM- 8 began, US President Bill Clinton included a call for  'meaningful participation' by developing countries in the  negotiating position he announced in Washington. With those  words, the debates that shaped agreement back in 1995  resurfaced, with an insistence on G-77/China involvement once  again linked to the level of ambition acceptable by the US. In  response, the G-77/China distanced itself from attempts to draw  developing countries into agreeing to anything that could be  interpreted as new commitments.

### COP-3

The Third Conference of the Parties (COP-3) was held from  1-11 December 1997 in Kyoto, Japan. Over 10,000 participants,  including representatives from governments, intergovernmental  organizations, NGOs and the media, attended the Conference,  which included a high-level segment featuring statements from  over 125 ministers. Following a week and a half of intense  formal and informal negotiations, including a session that began  on the final evening and lasted into the following day, Parties  to the FCCC adopted the Kyoto Protocol on 11 December. In the  Kyoto Protocol, Annex I Parties to the FCCC agreed to  commitments with a view to reducing their overall emissions of  six greenhouse gases (GHGs) by at least 5% below 1990 levels  between 2008 and 2012. The Protocol also established emissions  trading, 'joint implementation' between developed countries, and  a 'clean development mechanism' (CDM) to encourage joint  emissions reduction projects between developed and developing  countries. As of 15 March 1999, 84 countries have signed the  Kyoto Protocol.

Post-Kyoto FCCC Meetings: The subsidiary bodies of the FCCC met  from 2-12 June 1998 in Bonn, Germany. SBSTA-8 agreed to draft  conclusions on, inter alia, cooperation with relevant  international organizations, methodological issues, and  education and training. SBI-8 reached conclusions on, inter  alia, national communications, the financial mechanism and the  second review of adequacy of Annex I Party commitments. In its  sixth session, AG13 concluded its work on the functions of the  Multilateral Consultative Process (MCP). After joint SBI/SBSTA  consideration and extensive contact group debates on the  flexibility mechanisms, delegates could only agree to a  compilation document containing proposals from the G-77/China,  the EU and the US on the issues for discussion and frameworks  for implementation.

### COP-4

The Fourth Conference of the Parties (COP-4) was held  from 2-13 November 1998 in Buenos Aires, Argentina, and was  attended by over 5,000 participants. During the two-week  meeting, delegates deliberated decisions for the COP during SBI- 9 and SBSTA-9. Issues related to the Kyoto Protocol were  considered in joint SBI/SBSTA sessions. A high-level segment,  which heard statements from over 100 ministers and heads of  delegation, was convened on Thursday, 12 November. Following  hours of high-level 'closed door' negotiations and a final  plenary session that concluded early Saturday morning, delegates  adopted the Buenos Aires Plan of Action. Under the Plan of  Action, the Parties declared their determination to strengthen  the implementation of the Convention and prepare for the future  entry into force of the Kyoto Protocol. The Plan contains the  Parties' resolution to demonstrate substantial progress on: the  financial mechanism; the development and transfer of technology;  the implementation of FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9, as well as  Protocol Articles 2.3 and 3.14; activities implemented jointly  (AIJ); the mechanisms of the Kyoto Protocol; and the  preparations for the first meeting of the Parties (COP/MOP-1).

# REPORT OF THE WORKSHOP

The Technical Workshop opened on Friday, 9 April 1999. Kok Kee  Chow, Chair of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and  Technological Advice (SBSTA), highlighted two related milestones  recently achieved by Parties: the setting of time frames for  agreeing on a framework for rules related to Protocol Articles 6  (joint implementation), 12 (clean development mechanism) and 17  (emissions trading); and emphasizing the need for capacity  building that will facilitate the implementation of technology  transfer, AIJ and other issues. He stressed the urgency for  building capacity and noted that this workshop was the first  instance where Parties, IGOs and NGOs could measure their work  on the mechanisms since COP-4. He said the workshop would be  highly technical, with expert presentations and time for  questions, answers and exchange of views.

FCCC Executive Secretary Michael Zammit Cutajar, reiterating  that the key word for the workshop is 'technical,' said the  meeting would test the capacity of Parties to engage in  technical work while keeping political issues 'on the back  burner.' The need to address technical issues is growing  throughout the FCCC process and the full Convention bodies may  be too unwieldy for such work. He noted that 'technical' does  not necessarily mean complex and stressed that mechanisms must  work in the real world, not just on the drawing boards of  climate change specialists. He cautioned that striving too hard  for perfection runs the risk of diminishing the process and  called for credible but simple solutions.

Chair Chow noted that SBI Chair Bakary Kante (Senegal) would not  attend the session and that SBI Vice Chair Mohammad Reza Salamat  (Iran) would assume his duties.

On Friday and Saturday, 9-10 April, participants heard expert  presentations on different aspects of each of the Kyoto Protocol  mechanisms and engaged in question and answer sessions. From  Monday through Wednesday, 12-14 April, Parties presented their  proposals on technical and methodological aspects of the  mechanisms and met in working groups to further consider each of  the mechanisms. Discussions in the working groups were  structured according to the major technical and methodological  theme to which submissions by Parties, as well as any technical  inputs from UN agencies, IGOs and NGOs, were related. On  Thursday, participants offered their views on facilitating  capacity building for developing country Parties, especially  small island States and least developed countries, for project  activities under the CDM, and for facilitating the participation  of Parties with economies in transition in the other mechanisms.

# ARTICLE 12 - CLEAN DEVELOPMENT MECHANISM (CDM)

### Overview

Eric Haites, Margaree Consultants, Inc., presented an  overview of the CDM and discussed its operation and governance.  Regarding the financing of CDM projects, he cautioned against  using a single exclusive fund for all projects and recommended a  number of other options, including: a bilateral approach with  Annex I entities, governments and international institutions;  multilateral funds operated by legal entities or international  institutions; unilateral implementation by host governments or  country entities; or a portfolio of projects offered by one or  several host governments. Under the CDM, project proponents  would invest in or operate emissions reduction projects in non- Annex I Parties. Proponents could include: Annex I entities  (e.g., transnational companies); Annex I government agencies;  international institutions (e.g., regional development banks);  private investment funds (e.g., Edison Electric Institute  UtiliTree Fund); host country governments; and, host country  entities.

Haites recommended a 'tribunal' model for decisions relating to  project eligibility and certification of certified emissions  reductions (CERs). The Executive Board would receive  recommendations from operational entities retained by project  proponents. Interested stakeholders would be notified and have  the opportunity to review the report and request additional  information, and with proponents, may submit additional  information. He suggested that the Executive Board adopt  guidelines to define 'interested stakeholders.' Under the  'tribunal' model, the Executive Board provides an independent,  central forum for consistent and transparent decision making  that is open to all interested stakeholders. The disadvantages  are that decision making would be slow and costly. To function  as proposed, he said the Executive Board must have limited  membership and should reflect the 'partnership' nature of CDM  between Annex I and non-Annex I Parties. Members would be  nominated by governments and appointed by the COP/MOP.

Question and Answer Session: Discussion in the question and  answer session centered on the role of the Executive Board,  financing adaptation projects from CDM proceeds, and approaches  to defining and implementing CDM projects. On the proposed  centralized approach, whereby the Executive Board approves,  reviews and assesses the sustainability of every CDM project,  some participants said this had technical implications that  would significantly increase the administrative costs and  bureaucracy of the Board. One suggested limiting the Executive  Board's role to the design of criteria for reviews while a  number advocated a division of labor with other institutions.

In response to questions on the different pricing of CERs,  Haites said that these could differ depending on the types of  projects (e.g., some governments may choose not to accept CERs  from nuclear projects and thus the prices for such CERs would be  lower than those from energy efficiency projects even though  both meet the task of reducing greenhouse gases (GHGs)).

Participants inquired about possible percentage allocations of  CER proceeds towards administrative and adaptation costs. In  response, Haites said that they should be determined by the  COP/MOP. Regarding how adaptation funds will be used, he said  that the COP should make the final decision, but suggested that  a single fund, not limited to countries participating in CDM  projects, be established for this purpose. Concerning the  suggested options for funding, he said that a wide variety  allows for more projects and should not be seen as a  bureaucratic problem. Regarding the source of seed funds for the  Executive Board of CDM, Haites suggested that these may come  from other institutions and be recovered once the projects are  underway.

One participant underscored the need for both investing and host  countries to adopt guidelines for CDM projects. Another  suggested that the Executive Board should be mandated to produce  only draft decisions with final decisions taken by the COP/MOP.  However, decisions on operational issues such as determination  of projects and CERs may need to be made by the Executive Board.  Regarding stakeholder involvement in project registration, one  participant inquired who constitutes stakeholders, what issues  could be challenged and what could be a suitable time period for  this exercise. Haites responded that the Executive Board would  have to set involvement guidelines, stakeholder consultation  time could be limited to 30 to 60 days, and Parties could  determine stakeholder involved.

Reference Case/Baseline Methodologies (12.5(b) and (c)) and  Additionality (12.5(c)): Axel Michaelowa identified parameters  for consideration when setting a baseline, including geographic  and economic scale, lifetime of the baseline, lifetime of the  equipment and economic viability of the project. He noted that  the quality of the baseline is critical as parameter choice can  lead to 'cheating.' He underscored that an agreed baseline  methodology could minimize cheating and identified combined and  simplified approaches to baseline-setting, including benchmarks,  a technology matrix approach and a default baseline matrix  approach. He emphasized the importance of capacity building for  baseline use, especially among public institutions of host and  investor countries, private project proponents and third party  verifiers/certifiers. He noted that baseline methodology cannot  forecast uncertainty, solve the additionality issue, or prevent  baselines from rewarding current inefficient policies.

Robert Williams, UNIDO, discussed baselines for projects in the  industrial sector. He highlighted UNIDO's focus on industrial  efficiency and the identification of methods for evaluating  baseline methodologies. He described 'Identify,' a computer  software programme that assesses a project's GHG emissions  reduction and financial impact.

Liu Deshun, Tsinghua University, presented the developing  country perspective on baselines and additionality approaches.  He defined a baseline as a reference case estimating the GHG  emissions level that would most likely occur based on the  technical and economic circumstances in the host country in  absence of CDM activities. The baseline is used as a reference  case in calculating, assessing, measuring and verifying the net  CO2 emissions reduction, the additionality and the incremental  cost of reductions generated by a CDM project.

Liu identified different approaches to determining baselines.  For example, a project-specific approach can determine a precise  baseline based on the technical specification and/or operation  records of existing facilities. A technology benchmark matrix  approach forms a baseline by country and by technology category,  with a benchmark suitable for groups of similar CDM projects.  This approach would result in lower transaction costs in  implementation. Under a top-down baseline, the total national  emissions in a given year would be divided and assigned as  baseline emissions by, inter alia, sector, region, technology,  etc., in a top-down manner.

Question and Answer Session: Many questions centered on the  comparison between the various approaches to baseline  determination. One participant said determining the baseline for  a project that modifies an existing plan is relatively easy,  involving a comparison of the new and existing scenarios.  Determining a baseline for a new plan would be more difficult  because there is nothing to compare it against. One participant  asked whether the Parties could produce methodologies for each  type of project that could be used in calculating baseline  scenarios. Michaelowa cautioned against characterizing any  determination as straightforward, noting there are many  complicated issues that could affect the baseline.

One participant asked if, when a country has more than one CDM  project, there should be a baseline for each project or one for  all projects. Michaelowa said this depends on the approach  taken. Liu noted that baseline determination is a learning  process that will change as Parties gain experience. He  supported applying a project-by-project approach in the early  stages of the CDM. Williams said that individual projects should  be considered at the current stage, but noted that this project- by-project approach incurs high costs and that a technology  matrix should be used eventually. A business representative  expressed his preference for the project specific approach,  noting it is easier for the investor to understand. He  emphasized that the investment criteria must be kept in mind  when talking about financial additionality. Chair Chow asked how  a baseline should be calculated in scenarios without existing  emissions. For example, if a solar power plant is built in a  town without electricity, what is the justification for saying  that a coal-fired power plant was avoided.

One participant emphasized the CDM's two objectives: to foster  sustainable development and reduce emissions. If taking the  environmental effectiveness approach, then one would choose the  project-based approach with high transaction costs. If  sustainable economic development is the priority, it may be more  appealing to take the benchmark approach.

One participant noted that using anything other than project- specific baselines would in effect establish a 'ceiling.' If one  must take as a baseline the emissions of the entire electricity  sector, then a ceiling has been imposed. He preferred a project- by-project approach and noted that the first criterion for a  project should be contribution to sustainable development. When  discussing modification of a power generation plant to reduce  emissions, it must also be asked whether that reduction is less  expensive and generates more power, or generates the same power  at higher costs.

### ASSISTANCE IN MEETING COSTS OF ADAPTATION (12.8)

In her  presentation on 'Options and issues for activities related to  the adaptation component under the CDM,' Farhana Yamin, FIELD,  highlighted the provisions of the FCCC and Kyoto Protocol that  deal with financing of adaptation activities. She noted that to  date the implementation of the Convention's financial provisions  relating to adaptation have been limited. Regarding the value of  'proceeds' she said that they could refer to the value of  projects under the CDM or the market value of CER achieved as a  result of the project. She noted that the value of a CER is  unknown and is dependent on politically controversial decisions  such as supplementarity, which is critical to the size of  resource flows under the CDM. Stating that the adaptation  proceeds are uncertain and unlikely to be ample, she cautioned  against overloading the CDM with tasks it may not fulfill.

She said that, in the context of the Kyoto Protocol, it may be  difficult to justify making definitive decisions about which  country or group of countries are not vulnerable to the adverse  impacts of climate change, given the current state of knowledge  and the lengthy time frames involved. She suggested developing a  vulnerability index that would allow objective assessment to  facilitate decision making about adaptation and would ensure  distribution of proceeds to address the needs of vulnerable  groups.

Ravi Sharma, UNEP, discussed sharing of proceeds for adaptation.  He identified four generic categories of anticipatory  adaptation, including: increasing robustness of infrastructural  designs and long-term investments; increasing flexibility of  vulnerable managed systems; enhancing adaptability of vulnerable  systems; and reversing trends that increase vulnerability.  Regarding the costs of adaptation, he stressed the need for  methodology that considers whether the benefits of an adaptation  project outweigh the cost of implementation. He cited the  challenges of funding adaptation measures as: determining the  share of CDM proceeds; burdensharing of the proceeds between  Parties; apportionment between administrative expenses and  adaptation funds; linking the sharing of proceeds to the other  Kyoto mechanisms; and coordinating adaptation activities with  the Global Environmental Facility (GEF) and other Rio  Conventions for effective and efficient use of funds. He  concluded by calling for specific suggestions to: secure burden  sharing by Annex I countries for adaptation activities linked to  CDM; create links among the financial mechanisms of the  Convention to ensure funding for capacity building in vulnerable  countries; guarantee a level playing field with other Kyoto  mechanisms; and finalize the institutional framework for  operationalizing the CDM.

Question and Answer Session: The ensuing discussion focused on  how creation of a vulnerability index is envisioned. One  participant asked how the different factors causing  vulnerability in Africa and SIDS would be incorporated fairly in  a vulnerability index. Yamin said sources of vulnerability for  various geographic regions and contexts must be identified. She  supported the idea of a pilot phase to bring together existing  information in a practical and comprehensive manner. Another  participant emphasized the need to attract capital and to  determine what percentage of the CER is available for the  investor. Chair Chow noted the need to identify what adaptation  might mean, from national policy changes to genetic engineering.  One participant cautioned against incorporating the polluter  pays principle into adaptability through speculation on climate  change damage costs to fund and mitigate disaster through the  CDM, as it would result in developing countries bearing a  significant cost.

### ASSISTING IN ARRANGING FUNDING (12.6)

Annie Roncerel, UNDP,  spoke on the CDM as an innovative financing tool for energy  development. She noted that 80% of CO2 emissions come from the  energy sector, yet developing countries need more energy. She  called for 'greening' the energy economy with: end-use energy  efficiency; renewable energy sources; and next generation energy  technologies. Different solutions must be adapted to countries  where: markets for private finance exist; government support is  required to catalyze investment; or there is minimal or no  private finance. She underscored the need for an integrated  approach to defining national priorities for the CDM.

Dieter Strack discussed financial engineering for renewable  energy projects. He stressed that the most important issue was  the 'commerciability' gap between the amount of financing needed  to make a project commercially viable and the amount available.  He said that financing projects in renewable energy required use  of all available financial instruments to create a project- tailored mix, which will increase competitiveness of the product  and the internal rate of return. Regarding public versus private  financing for projects, he noted that in principle the financing  structure is the same, with the exception of those using  official development assistance (ODA). If publicly sponsored,  ODA can be tapped directly based on bilateral financial  protocols. If privately sponsored, the public authorities in the  recipient countries must approve the use of ODA but are often  reluctant to do so due to lack of additionality of funds. He  cautioned that even if a project is entirely publicly financed,  it must prove to be commercially viable or, considering the  'commerciability' gap, it should be almost commercially viable.  He outlined potential financial sources such as public financing  to 'buy down' production costs and private debt financing.

Youba Sokona, ENDA, examined development financing options for  developing countries, including ODA; multilateral and bilateral  loans; and foreign direct investment (FDI). He noted new options  presented through the FCCC, including the GEF, AIJ, CDM, JI and  emissions trading. Given the trend of declining rates of public  funding, he underscored the need to consider these mechanisms  for development and reviewed their ability to meet the  requirement for financial and environmental additionality. He  highlighted the need to examine the role of the GEF in relation  to the CDM, and said it must be complementary. Regarding African  needs, he stressed, inter alia, food security, employment  security and secure financial aid flows.

Ken Newcombe, World Bank, reviewed the AIJ/JI experience in  relation to funding. He noted barriers to AIJ investment in  Africa, including risk, unfamiliarity with host countries and a  lack of confidence, and noted that many fear that CDM will  follow the same path. He underscored the importance of  investment funds because they pool investments, intermingle  economies where FDI has not traditionally flowed, and promote  new technologies. He highlighted the prototype carbon fund,  which spreads investment across a range of countries and  technologies, on behalf of many companies that did not want to  undertake ventures individually.

Question and Answer Session: Statements in this session focused  on, inter alia, investment funds, the relationship between ODA  and the CDM, and financial additionality. Regarding investment  funds, one Party urged looking at the range of options and noted  that pooling of projects can occur in other ways. In response to  Newcombe's comment on investment plans, one participant said the  private sector and regional groups of countries can perform that  function. Another Party noted that investment funds can allow  participants to implement riskier projects, but asked what  incentive exists for the fund manager to include them in his  portfolio unless he expects credits at a cheaper price. Newcombe  replied he could envision governments and agencies who may  include them and noted that the world of funds is diverse and  can be tailored to specific managers. He noted that there are  many barriers to involving the private sector in this process.

One participant asked if the CDM could compete with FDI and  sought clarification as to whether it was compatible or  competing. Newcombe responded that the CDM is a catalyst for the  flow of capital, and that it should be possible to negotiate a  short-run capacity project in developing countries. The  difference between investing at home and investing in developing  countries could be up to US$60-70 per tonne, thus providing an  incentive to investors. Sokona cautioned against examining the  CDM in isolation and said it could be complementary.

Regarding additionality, Sokona said that the COP must agree on  a level of ODA from which the financial flows related to climate  are additional and re-think how to re-use GEF money before the  CDM starts in the year 2000. One participant asked if  implementation of the CDM would result in declining ODA. Sokona  said existing ODA must not be reduced, and called for an  enabling environment for private sector investment in the CDM. A  participant asked how SIDS could cooperate to amass funds and  prioritize project proposals. Newcombe replied that this is a  role for local development banks or other banks, such as  national financial institutions, and noted that efforts by local  development banks to spread risks will create a benefit for that  country.

### VALIDATION, VERIFICATION AND CERTIFICATION (12.5, 12.6, 12.7,  12.9), TECHNICAL AND PROCESS ISSUES

Johannes Heister, World  Bank, and Einar Telenes, Der Norske Veritas, discussed  verification and certification through lessons learned from the  World Bank Ilumex project, audited by Der Norske Veritas.  Heister equated verification with validation of a product and  suggested that certification be an auditing process similar to  the International Standards Organization (ISO) method. Telenes  called for generic operational criteria for certification, such  as ISO 14000, to detail and standardize requirements for, inter  alia, monitoring and reporting, control of operations, training  of personnel, document and data control and non-conformance  handling. He emphasized that a monitoring and verification  protocol is just as important as a baseline for ensuring  transparent, relevant and consistent monitoring of a project.  Noting that established practices of auditing are applicable to  GHGs, he recommended using established methodologies to reduce  transaction costs and increase transparency. He called for pilot  project verification, certification throughout project  lifecycles and rules to address non-compliance.

Jayant Sathaye, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, discussed  the monitoring, evaluation, reporting, verification and  certification (MERVC) of climate change mitigation projects.  Regarding what is to be monitored, he discussed: energy  production and/or use, GHG emissions and carbon stocks; other  environmental impacts (biodiversity, soil conservation,  watershed management); and socioeconomic impacts. He discussed  methods for estimating GHG savings off-site, through use of:  default current and/or future GHG emissions factors; GHG  emissions factors based on marginal hourly or daily energy  savings; or utility published GHG emissions factors. He  discussed three challenges for calculating net energy and GHG  savings: positive spillover or leakage, market transformation,  and free riders. He also discussed the cost of MERVC and the  roles of the primary MERVC actors (project developers,  consultant organizations, NGOs, government agencies, and  international organizations). He concluded that transparent and  simple, yet effective, international guidelines are needed for  MERVC and suggested that a handbook for MERVC energy-efficiency  projects be developed.

Harris Gleckman, UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs,  reviewed the history of the ISO work on standards for  environmental management and examined possible context it may  provide for considering implementation of Protocol mechanisms.  He noted that ISO has a Climate Technology Task Force and is  eager to involve a wider constituency. He noted that ISO has  attracted attention within the private sector and that some  companies apply ISO standards internally to gauge environmental  performance. He identified trouble spots with the ISO standards.  For example, existing environmental standards are conformance- based, not performance-based, and do not judge a company's  environmental impact or performance, but rather the conformity  of its management system to the ISO standards. As for the CDM,  he noted options for next steps. The first option is to  acknowledge that these issues are too complex to be dealt with  at the intergovernmental level, and should be sent to ISO for  consideration. Second, the intergovernmental process could  handle rulemaking and definitions, with certification addressed  separately. Third, the intergovernmental process could handle  all the rulemaking, definitions and certification.

Question and Answer Session: One participant remarked that the  first option presented by Gleckman was not feasible, but  supported exploring options two and three and proposed  establishing an informal joint working group to explore ISO's  expertise. Another commented that the speaker's presentation  illustrated that there are many implications for monitoring and  cautioned against complicating the process.

Proposals from Parties on Technical and Methodological Issues:  CHINA underscored the principle of supplementarity, the need for  the host country to decide whether a project promotes  sustainable development, and the need to assist the developed  countries in achieving compliance. Regarding methodological  issues, he stated that funding for CDM projects shall be  additional to ODA, GEF and other financial commitments of the  developed country Parties under the FCCC. He also noted that the  baselines for CDM projects should be done only on a project-by- project basis. The concept of fungibility among the three  mechanisms is totally unacceptable.

GERMANY spoke on behalf of the EU, as well as Bulgaria, Croatia,  Czech Republic, Hungary, Latvia, Poland, Romania and Slovenia.  She called for preconditions for Annex I and non-Annex I Parties  wanting to participate in CDM. Both must: ratify the Kyoto  Protocol; be bound by a compliance regime adopted by the  COP/MOP; have not been excluded from participation in the CDM;  and comply with their commitments under Article 12. The two  steps she envisioned for the CDM process were the validation of  the project and certification of the emissions reductions.  Validation would only be given if, inter alia: all Parties  involved have approved the project activity; all entities  involved can demonstrate they are entitled to participate in the  CDM; and the project participants provide a determination of  baselines to the operational entity. Certification will take  place only after a project has been validated.

INDIA stressed that CDM funding must be additional to ODA and  the FCCC commitments. There are many pitfalls to the sector  approach for baselines, as opposed to the bottom-up project  approach. He said that carbon is not a commodity for exchange in  transactions and that the Protocol has not envisaged any  interaction between mechanisms. A CER is simply a certificate  and should not become tradable. He said the CDM should be  constructed to ensure that least developed countries (LDCs) get  their share of CDM projects.

NORWAY spoke on behalf of Australia, Canada, Iceland, Japan, New  Zealand, the Russian Federation, Ukraine and the US (the  Umbrella Group). He said certification should be a two-step  process: projects would have to be registered with an operation  entity in principle prior to implementation; and once project  activities are underway, the resulting emissions reductions or  removals are certified on a periodic basis. In order to be  registered, projects would have to, inter alia, have a credible  baseline, meet all the criteria (such as the approval of each  Party involved) and have adequate provisions for monitoring of  project emissions. Once a project is implemented, the emissions  reductions would be certified by an operational entity  periodically after the reductions or removals have actually  occurred. He said further work is needed on questions of  compliance, linkages between the mechanisms and advantage of  fungibility between the mechanisms.

SOUTH AFRICA said that the dual purpose of the CDM must be kept  in mind in every step. While it holds great promise, the risk  level involved in the application of the CDM is much higher for  developing host countries. He said that designing the CDM to  determine whether projects have helped Annex B Parties reach  their targets can be accomplished, but the concept of  sustainable development is not easily defined or quantified.

The US discussed benchmarking for the CDM and JI. He said there  are two baseline choices: project-by-project, where a reference  baseline is created for each project activity; and a benchmark,  which creates a performance standard for a given sector and  against which individual project activity is measured to  determine additionality and assess credits. He said the  electricity generation sector would be a good area for using a  benchmark, but noted that questions remain regarding what level  of performance it should require and how often the benchmark  should be reviewed.

UGANDA recommended that the Executive Board should not exceed 25  members and be based on accepted and normal UN regional groups  with due consideration to subregional balance. He suggested that  the CDM operate in a 'mix mode' - multilaterally, bilaterally  and with a general fund - with the same rules, procedures and  principles. He stressed financial and environmental  additionality and that the CDM should be additional to ODA and  GEF support. He noted that ongoing projects should not be  converted to the CDM or JI. Noting that supplementarity is both  a technical and politically controversial issue, he stated its  consideration can result in a drift towards innovative  technologies.

VENEZUELA noted that the host country should be the sole judge  of eligibility and outlined prerequisites for project approval  including identification of: the project's net contribution,  short- and long-term costs, and risks and liabilities for host  country, including the costs of operation. He stated that: both  the host country and the participating Annex B country must  approve the CDM activities before consideration by the Executive  Board; baselines should be project specific and correspond to  the most cost-effective option available; and that projects  should in no case result in limitations, ceilings or 'growth  lines' by sector or any other type of commitment.

Discussion: The ensuing discussion centered on ODA and the CDM,  coverage of CDM administrative costs, the need for CDM  benchmarks, fungibility between the mechanisms, and addressing  non-compliance. One participant asked if the percentage of  administrative costs of adaptation should be fixed, part of the  budget or additional to the budget. He said funding to cover  certification costs must be provided whatever the results of the  project might be. One participant said that in the case of  carbon sinks, the host country should be liable for not  reversing what has been accomplished. He opposed fungibility  between the mechanisms, noting that a relationship will develop  between the prices of the mechanisms.

One participant noted that the private sector may find the early  stages of CDM implementation risky, thereby making ODA quite  important. Some participants saw a role for ODA in capacity  building for CDM projects, but not for CDM projects themselves.  Regarding private sector involvement in the CDM, one participant  said only companies under domestic obligation to reduce CO2  emissions should be allowed to participate. Another asked if a  project could be developed by a non-Annex I country without a  sponsor, whether CERs can be sold to more than one country and  whether the CER recipient Party could vary from year to year.

Regarding project approval, one participant said transaction  costs would be very high if each project were fully examined.  Regarding the authorization of legal entities, one participant  asked if a Party could authorize the participation of  subsidiaries of companies and financial institutions based  overseas. Another participant said that a Party authorizing  legal entities must bear responsibility for them. One  participant noted that the CDM provides an incentive, especially  for companies that produce advanced environmental technologies,  to invest in projects early and, in return, sell CERs earned.  Regarding additionality and transfer of technology, participants  underscored that the CDM should not substitute previous  commitments. Noting that the CDM is intended to achieve  commitments, not just make money, participants agreed that  private entities should be defined.

### WORKING GROUP ON THE CDM

Gylvan Meira Filho (Brazil), Cornelia  Quennet-Thielen (Germany) and Brian Fisher (Australia)  facilitated the working group on the CDM. Discussions in the  working group centered on the terms of reference of the  Executive Board and on reference/baseline methodologies and  additionality, validation, verification, certification and  funding and adaptation.

The need for further work on methodologies and clear rules for  project eligibility was highlighted. A number of participants  stressed that the rules, modalities and procedures for the CDM  should be simple and environmentally credible, and underscored  that the CDM should not focus on profits but on emissions  reductions. Another cautioned against oversimplifying the rules  for the CDM, as this would weaken its developmental objectives.  Participants addressed the need to: distinguish between the CDM  and other projects; minimize transaction costs when designing  CDM projects; distinguish between certifying project activities  and certifying emissions; and seek guidance from the COP/MOP on  the elaboration of the modalities and procedures.

Regarding the baseline methodologies, participants inquired as  to the extent to which sustainable development components should  be included. One participant proposed that each host country  identify sustainable development indicators relevant for each  project. Another noted the difficulty of developing exhaustive  lists of sustainable development indicators. Noting that the  sustainability of the CDM can only be gauged at the end of the  project, one participant highlighted the need to create a sense  of ownership within the host country and recommended involving  local communities.

With regard to the need for predefined baseline methodology, one  participant objected to using top-down approaches of defining  general baselines for an entire sector or country and said that  the perimeter of the baseline should be the same as that of the  project activities. A number of participants objected to the  suggested use of economic indicators in baselines to determine  CDM eligibility, noting that this is very complex and would put  the Executive Board in the role of analyzing the potential  profitability of individual projects.

On baseline setting, one participant raised the need to devote  attention to the indirect effects of baseline selection on  national policies and regulatory regimes, noting that a host  country might implement policies to increase returns, which may  lead to higher emissions. One participant said that an agreed  upon baseline would reflect the objectives of both Parties  involved in a CDM project. Another participant noted that  defining baseline methodology against conditions for  additionality would be very bureaucratic. She preferred  definition of various methodologies for baseline creation,  noting that one method would lead to environmental stringency.  On project-by-project benchmarks, one participant cautioned that  the quest for transparency could lead to higher transaction  costs. He proposed that project registration or validation and  sustainable development determination be left to the host  country.

Proponents for dynamic baselines argued that they would create  continuous pressure for investment. They said that static  baselines could increase the uncertainty for the investor.  Another participant argued that dynamic baselines could lead to  temptations to institute changes to meet an elusive objective.  He advocated for review of baselines and cautioned against  confusing it with the concept of dynamic baselines. Another  participant noted that, for investor certainty, there must be a  baseline estimate, but that a baseline might change over time.  Another asked whether, if a project only runs at 60%, a baseline  should be recalculated to reflect that the project is not  operating at 100%. One participant objected to periodic revision  of the baseline, noting that unexpected events that come later  cannot have the retroactive power of modifying a decision taken  earlier. Such revision could lead to data manipulation. One  participant stated that baselines must be static because these  are necessary for the determination of the GHGs mitigated. He  added that, if there is need to adjust the carbon offsets, then  insurance, penalties and securities must be considered as  guarantees to Parties involved.

On additionality, one participant said there was a need to add  investment additionality and regulatory additionality to the  criteria for baseline determination and noted that private FDI  projects risk overloading CDM. Some participants supported  consideration of investment additionality stating that this  would be useful in determining whether a project contributes to  sustainable development and would allow 'no regrets' investment  to take place. They stressed that FDI should not lead to an  increase in emissions and that companies should be encouraged to  do more. Another participant sought clarification on whether two  types of additionality would be necessary for the CDM and JI and  asked if there was a possibility of a common definition.

One participant identified two ways of using baselines: to  qualify a project and determine its eligibility; and to quantify  the CERs. He noted even if Article 6 (JI) does not require  congruence with Article 12 (CDM), there should symmetry between  the JI and CDM baselines. He noted that, in any case, a first  step of certification is the definition of a baseline. Two steps  in the CDM process were identified as: checking the criteria for  eligibility and certifying the emissions reduction. The stage  before certification is a very qualitative judgement on whether  a project meets the criteria established for the CDM, whether it  is consistent with international agreements, and if there is  sufficient monitoring. In principle, certification should happen  before the implementation of the project. Certification or  validation of the CDM project will remove most uncertainty  surrounding the project and reduce risk.

Regarding when certification should take place, one participant  suggested that this be left to the Parties initiating the  project to decide on and noted that certification of the  emissions reduction can take place only after the reduction has  taken place. Another said that the certificate of validation for  CDM activities must be obtained before the project begins,  otherwise trying to retroactively validate a project would incur  high costs.

With regard to registration, one participant noted that there  would have to be a registry for the projects that are validated  and one for the emissions that are certified. He cautioned  against confusing registration with validation, certification or  emissions reduction certification. A question was raised if when  two Parties have reached agreement on a CDM project, they would  have to wait for registration and validation from the Executive  Board before proceeding with the project. On the timing of  validation, it was observed that a project developer might  prefer to receive it earlier in the project, as it could be  risky later. He suggested that rather than mandating the time  when validation is to be conducted, information on the possible  risks of late validation could be provided.

On early action, one participant said that investors in early  action schemes run the risk that the COP/MOP may refuse to  recognize their activities. Another participant illustrated two  scenarios: the optimistic scenario whereby the rules for the  early start are approved at the next COP; and the less  optimistic scenario where the final rules are not approved at  the next COP. In the first scenario, CERs will be certified  after the year 2000, while in the second scenario there will be  a transitional period leading up to the entry into force of the  Protocol and thus the reductions will have to be validated  retroactively. He said that those who carry out early action  schemes would have to meet the costs of retroactive validation.  One participant emphasized the need for transitional rules for  the early start of the CDM. He proposed differential use of  terms such as registration before the rules and validation after  the rules are established.

On the terms of reference for the Executive Board, participants  proposed that the Board: review and update an indicative list of  suggested methodologies for particular project types; determines  the guidelines for baselines; and supervise the development of  baseline methodologies. More work to establish linkages between  the different approaches proposed to the development of baseline  methodology was urged. One participant raised a question about  work in the initial period leading up to the entry into force of  the Protocol when the Executive Board will be established.

On independent auditing and verification, one participant  proposed that the operational entities conduct this themselves.  Another participant objected stating that auditing should be  conducted independently of the operational entities. The need  for clear designation of an independent entity to audit and  verify the project separate from the project proponent or  implementing entity was voiced. The need to ensure total  professional independence of third party entities undertaking  validation was stressed.

One participant said that interested transnational and national  companies could participate in the CDM. The need to balance  bureaucracies, costs and results as well as uncertainty was  emphasized. Regarding funding of CDM projects, one participant  proposed that it be arranged after certification of the  activity. Noting difficulties with involving the private sector,  another underscored the importance of a fund for the early  stages. She asked if the adaptation fund would be centralized  for all countries or only for non-Annex I countries. She said  host countries could contribute a symbolic share of project  investment. One participant noted the need to determine what  adaptation projects will be eligible for funding and to assess  vulnerability. Another proposed that the vulnerability  assessment could be one element in project assessment and noted  that a theoretical vulnerability assessment followed by a  concrete assessment seemed repetitive.

Emphasizing the importance of the adaptation fund for developing  countries, one participant underscored the need to determine  what share of CDM proceeds should go into the fund and how they  should be split between administrative and adaptation costs.  Another asked how the percentage of CDM proceeds for adaptation  would be captured and remarked that the investor would need to  receive credit for the percentage given to adaptation and should  not be penalized by the redirection of funds.

The need to determine what eligible administrative costs are and  how funds will be shared was raised. A participant cautioned  against bringing ODA into the discussion. Money for the special  adaptation fund should be reliable and not dependent on the  market. Another said indicative lists of priority projects could  be useful in distributing funds and said that emissions trading  and JI should also render adaptation funds.

A developing country participant asked if adaptation funds  earned from a project would go directly to the host country or  to a general fund. Another advocated a high volume of CDM  projects to generate a high level of proceeds, keep  administrative costs low and ensure environmental integrity. One  developing country noted that a high 'adaptation tax' would  result in lower investment flows to developing countries because  countries could bear part of the tax. Participants emphasized  the need to: keep administrative costs low to keep the CDM  attractive; generate a high volume of projects; cooperate to  pool resources; and increase cost effectiveness. They  acknowledged that a large volume of CDM projects could diminish  the value of CERs.

In summarizing the discussion, Co-Chair Quennet-Thielen noted  that a number of participants: expressed the need to separate  the CDM from ODA; stated that there should be no additionality  requirement on the private capital flows; identified the need to  address baseline setting in the short and long term; and  recognized the possible role of the Executive Board in  supervising entities involved in CDM and providing guidance on  methodologies. She said that a general agreement was emerging  that a host country is the best judge on a project's  contribution to sustainable development. She highlighted the  need: for consistency with Protocol language; for demonstrated  approval by Parties of the certification criteria; and to  address baseline methodology. She noted differing opinions as to  whether baselines should be static or dynamic and said Parties  would need to demonstrate that they have procedures for  monitoring CDM projects. Regarding the timing of certification,  she noted that several participants preferred to see it done  before project initiation.

Concerning who should do work during the first phase, she  recalled many participants had said this was the responsibility  of the operational entities, although some proposed the  involvement of the Executive Board. As for CERs, there were  diverging views regarding their sale or use for compliance with  some suggesting that they should be shelved. She underlined the  need for further work on the CDM interim phase, noting that a  number of participants were in favor of an early start. She  noted the need for different sets of rules for the early start  period and for the post COP/MOP period.

# ARTICLE 6 - JOINT IMPLEMENTATION

### Overview

Lubomir Nondek provided an overview of Article 6  projects, and identified major remaining problems as: the  relationship between Emission Reduction Units (ERUs) credited  and the total project performance; the influence of baseline  methodology on the resulting project performance; the lack of  definition for the role of host country government and legal  entities in verification; and the lack of clarity surrounding  'additionality' and 'supplementarity' requirements. He called  for: review of all existing AIJ projects to provide a real-life  background for discussions; adoption of a simplified approach to  baseline construction, leaving the host country to determine  amount credited; and elaboration of a legal and institutional  framework for the transfer of the ERUs credited.

Edward Helme, Center for Clean Air Policy, discussed options for  determining baselines and additionality for JI projects. He  noted that a high baseline is not desirable for both  implementing and host countries. He emphasized the importance of  a good data system when determining additionality, noting that  if one does not exist it is an issue of international concern.  He identified two approaches for defining additionality:  developing JI rules as identical to those needed for the CDM,  with benchmarks and project-level analysis; and establishment of  automatic additionality based on top-down baselines for  countries in compliance with Protocol Articles 5 (methodological  issues), 7 (communication of information) and 8 (review of  information), and stricter addtionality tests for countries not  in compliance with these articles.

### QUESTION AND ANSWER SESSION

The following discussion focused  on: how to calculate additionality for countries with economies  in transition (EIT countries) that are EU candidates; how to  address ERU crediting in situations of non-compliance; whether  ERUs from a JI project could be transferred if both countries  were not in compliance; the risk of trading and investor  liability involved in JI and emissions trading; and the  comparative transaction costs of JI and emissions trading. Helme  emphasized the importance of an adequate data system to verify  achievements. One participant noted that transaction costs  associated with emissions trading are lower than those  associated with JI. In response, Helme noted that establishment  of emissions trading mechanisms are costly.

Reference Case/Baseline Methodologies and Additionality (6.1  (b)), Verification And Reporting (6.2), Technical and Process  Issues: Jane Ellis, OECD, discussed lessons from AIJ pilot phase  projects involving EIT countries. She said that while national  guidelines for calculating emissions baselines exist in some  host countries, there is no international guidance. She noted  the limited geographical distribution of AIJ projects and said  that a majority of the projects are replacement projects in the  energy sector. She stated that additionality definitions varied  widely among the projects. On replacement projects, she noted  inconsistency in baselines and attributed this to divergent  assumptions and perceptions of what is valid. In order to  improve the reporting of emission baselines, she proposed: more  precise sector disaggregation; separate reporting of sub- projects; separate reporting of non-operations projects;  provision of references such as detailed baseline studies; use  of common accounting formats for emission benefits; and  clarification of what carbon stocks are included in biotic  projects. On methodological improvements, she called for  consistent methods to: determine project timelines; include  safety margins; and give guidance for 'greenfield' projects,  accounting benefits for energy efficiency measures and  definition of system boundaries. She noted that project specific  baselines need detailed data and stated that current baseline  reports are often inconsistent, incomplete and not transparent.  She stressed that the AIJ experience from the pilot phase is  insufficient as a basis for JI and CDM methodology. Baseline  rules setting will determine environmental integrity and  significance of JI and the CDM.

Matthew Mendis, Alternative Energy Development, Inc., discussed  'Developing greenhouse gas mitigation projects  and defining  baselines.' He stressed that the CDM and JI are not aimed at  changing macroeconomic policies, regulations or institutions,  but are intended to facilitate investment in project activities  that will result in: voluntary participation; real, measurable  and long-term benefits; additional reductions of GHGs; and  assistance for non-Annex I countries in achieving sustainable  development. He outlined the CDM project cycle and remarked that  it is not different from other project development except that  it had CDM validation. He identified baseline definition as one  of the key elements of validation. He proposed that the ultimate  responsibility for the determination of a baseline lie with the  host country. In defining baselines, economic optimums as well  as current trends in technology and practice should be  considered.

Question and Answer Session: In the following discussion, one  participant noted that when considering greenfield projects in  developing countries for the CDM, benefits such as international  collaboration and government endorsement should be considered in  addition to economic benefits. Mendis said that proposed cost- effective projects should be undertaken anyway without being CDM  projects.

Proposals from Parties on Technological and Methodological  Issues: GERMANY, on behalf of the EU and others, cited criteria  that Parties must meet in order to undertake activities under  Article 6, including that they are bound by a compliance regime,  have ratified the Protocol and comply with reporting  requirements under the Convention and Protocol. She said both  public and private parties should be able to participate without  modifying Annex I countries' commitments under the Protocol. She  noted two stages of validation and certification, with the  validation stage including determination of a baseline and  provision of information for accurate and systematic monitoring.  Regarding certification of emissions reductions, she said  certifiers must be economically and institutionally independent  from institutions undertaking JI. She said Parties should report  on these projects annually and, in addition, report on the  projects in national communications. She said additional  guidelines should be subject to regular review, starting no  later than 2012 and in regular intervals thereafter.

JAPAN supported the creation of guidelines to ensure smooth and  consistent implementation of Article 6. She said project  eligibility requires the approval of Parties involved and a  reduction in emissions or an enhancement of removals additional  to any that would otherwise occur. She called for ERUs  equivalent to one metric tonne of CO2 with serial numbers  identifying the Party of origin, the time of issuance and a  project identifier. She proposed that Parties develop registries  to record ERU holdings, transfers and retirements and that these  registries be publicly available. Regarding reporting and  verification, she said both hosting and investing Parties should  provide annual reports under Article 7, and review under Article  8 of the Kyoto Protocol. She said in cases of non-compliance,  reporting and verification might be accomplished on a project- by-project basis with the goal of limiting transaction costs and  enhancing transparency.

Working group on Joint Implementation: This working group was  co-chaired by Ole Plougmann (Denmark) and Alexander Metalnikov  (Russian Federation). During the discussions, participants  debated, inter alia, whether and/or how the COP should develop  guidelines for JI projects, whether the language of Article 6  indicates an additionality requirement for JI projects, and  approaches to verification and reporting.

Regarding guidelines, a number of participants remarked that  Article 6 authors had foreseen the need to regulate and  underscored the importance of safeguards and oversight, noting  that national communications are not always comprehensive and  accurate. Some pointed out that the Protocol states that Parties  'may,' as opposed to 'shall,' develop guidelines, thereby  leaving it to their discretion. Noting that there is no  indication that the JI activities should be subjected to  external verification, one participant expressed concern that  one project-based mechanism is subject to scrutiny while the  other is not. He suggested that aspects of Article 12 be  incorporated into JI guidelines. Others noted a fundamental  difference between JI and the CDM, in that the CDM generates new  units, which increases the assigned amount budget, while JI  credits come from the assigned amount of Annex B Parties.  Another said checks and balances for JI exist in the form of  national communications.

Delegates debated at length whether additionality requirements  were applicable to Article 6 projects. One participant noted  that industry groups do not support additionality, but said it  is important to the host country, whether required or not.  Another stated that Protocol Article 6.1(b) requires emissions  reductions resulting from a project to be additional to those  that would have occurred normally and questioned what the value  of the projects would be if emissions reductions would have  occurred anyway. Some participants remarked that without  additionality, JI was no different from emissions trading.

Other participants stressed that there are no additionality  requirements in Article 6 nor references to share of proceeds.  Some said that imposing such additionality would compel  companies to choose emissions trading rather than JI. Others  stressed that additionality was not necessary if a Party was in  compliance with Articles 5 (methodological issues) and 7  (communication of information).

Regarding verification and reporting, participants considered  whether a one- or a two-stage approach is better. The proposed  two-stage approach consists of a validation stage prior to  certification. The validation stage would include Party  approval, determination of a baseline and provision of  information for accurate and systematic monitoring. One  participant opposed a two-stage approach, noting that it is not  necessary for JI, and would result in turning ERUs into CERs.  One proponent of a two-stage approach said Article 6 projects  should meet a number of criteria, including: approval of all  Parties and legal entities involved; provision of information  regarding determination of baselines; and demonstration that  reductions are real, measurable and long-term. She said the  first stage of validation ensures that Parties acquiring ERUs  are in compliance with Articles 5 and 7. Another participant  said that, hypothetically, the host country in a JI project  would give consideration to the implications for national  emissions. One participant said experience with JI projects  shows that the main problem lies in calculating the baselines  and proposed a process using agreed upon methodologies for best  results. Another participant said rules for the CDM could guide  JI, but should not be mandatory. In summing up, Chair Chow noted  the need to find the balance between cost effectiveness and  environmental integrity.

# ARTICLE 17 - EMISSIONS TRADING

### Overview

Erik Haites, Margaree Consultants, Inc., provided an  introduction to emissions trading. He discussed how emissions  trading would reduce costs and noted his assumption that  allowances would be allocated to participants at no charge. An  emitter with low control costs can reduce its emissions below  the quantity allocated and sell the extra permits. If the market  price is higher than the cost of reducing the emissions, it  earns income from the extra reductions. An emitter with high  control costs that needs additional allowances can buy surplus  permits from other sources. If the market price is less than the  cost of controlling emissions at its own facilities, it saves  money.

Regarding compliance, he noted that each participating source  must hold allowances equal to its actual emissions and that  accurate monitoring and reporting of actual emissions is  essential for environmental integrity. Like any environmental  regulation, compliance must be enforced if the environmental  goal is to be achieved. Haites noted that penalties for non- compliance must exceed the financial gains from non-compliance.  This could require loss of permits plus financial penalties. To  work well, emissions trading requires a competitive market for  the allowances, which means a large number of buyers and sellers  with no single buyer accounting for a large share of total  purchases. He concluded that GHGs are well suited to emissions  trading from an environmental perspective and the potential cost  savings are large (50 to 80%). The main issues outstanding in  implementing Article 17 are: liability arrangements to provide  an incentive for compliance; possible market power by a large  buyer or seller; implementation of supplementarity provisions;  and treatment of 'hot air.' Question and Answer Session: Discussion in this session covered  a range of issues, including: the participation of legal  entities and non-state actors; entitlements to credits;  fungibility of CDM credits; supplementarity; and reporting  requirements. Participants also addressed providing incentives  for compliance, rather than penalties for non-compliance. In  response to a question regarding participation of non-State  actors in the trading regime, Haites said that legal entities  would participate in two ways, as brokers or as buyers and  sellers. Another participant noted that if legal entities are  excluded, there would only be 39 Parties to trade. A business  representative stressed the importance of the issue for industry  and requested its inclusion in the agenda for the upcoming  subsidiary bodies meeting.

One participant raised questions regarding the basis for the  determination of holdings of allowances for emissions trading  and stressed that the speaker's presentation had presumed  certain holdings and ownerships. He noted that the Protocol  includes the concept of market based mechanisms, but this does  not imply a creation of the requisite right to hold such  allowances for the purposes of exchanges. Another participant  noted that assigned amounts have been indicated as provisional  rights and questioned if this is morally correct. This approach  puts polluters in the position to make money, even though they  are the ones responsible for the problem. The speaker said the  reductions should be characterized as 'savings' rather than  'profits.' One participant asked if the 50-80% savings figure cited by  Haites assumed that the CDM is fungible with other mechanisms.  If so, that would increase global demand for CDM projects, since  they would generate tradable reductions. Concerning fungibility,  one observer noted that Protocol Articles 3.10 and 3.11 allow  Annex I countries to acquire CERs from the CDM, but do not imply  that they would be transferred again. With emissions trading, he  said the fungibility issue should be treated carefully.  Participants also asked: if the speaker assumed the prices were  the same with or without supplementarity; if compliance costs  would go down in the second period because of increased  investments; and whether the speaker envisaged a yearly  stocktaking and, if so, whether countries would be required to  reduce by a certain amount each year.

One participant inquired about the leading models for  forecasting and the possibility of the COP placing them on-line  to reflect changes in markets to enable better decisions by  Parties. Another noted that emissions trading is intended to cut  costs for Annex B countries subject to supplementary, and  questioned the need for trading on a global scale. Noting that  CDM activities could begin in the year 2000 while Article 6  activities could not, one participant questioned whether the  model took into account the difference between the mechanisms.  He said the difference affects competitiveness, fungibility and  comparative advantage between mechanisms. The speaker noted that  the time frames would affect the market mechanisms and noted  that most models operate on five- and ten-year time frames.  Recalling that there is to be sharing of proceeds for CDM, one  participant asked what that sharing will entail, what the link  between the two mechanisms is and how non-Annex I Parties would  trade them. Questions were also raised on compliance reserves,  an annual surrender and eligibility requirements for trading.

Designing an appropriate international framework for emissions  trading, including verification reporting and accountability  issues: Jan Corfee-Morlot, OECD, discussed monitoring, reporting  and review under the Protocol and focussed on: Article 3, which  provides elements of the accounting system that allows a country  to choose a base year other than 1990; Article 5, which sets out  monitoring requirements and identifies IPCC methods with the  possibility of 'appropriate adjustments' to be used for  monitoring; Article 7 on reporting to demonstrate compliance,  which calls for annual inventories, periodic communication and  supplemental information to demonstrate how to ensure  compliance; and Article 8 on the review to assess  implementation, which calls for expert review of national  inventories and communications.

She said that national systems for inventories provide a basis  for review and should result in quality information to establish  compliance and assessment. Aggregate national inventories that  will show the performance of Parties would only be available by  the end of the first commitment period. She stated that the  interpretation of Article 5.1 (national inventories) should be  closely linked to the 'good practice' work of the IPCC, which  consists of elements on: institutional arrangements; choice of  methods for GHG estimation; data collection procedures; and  expert review, evaluation of uncertainty, quality assessment and  control.

Annie Petsonk, Environmental Defense Fund (EDF), presented case  studies and practical experience in reporting, verification and  accountability. She said that environmental markets at  international and national levels could improve environmental  performance through compliance with total emissions limitation  requirements, as well as cut costs and provide flexibility. She  said that emissions trading and related market instruments can  drive entrepreneurial forces towards innovation of cheaper,  faster and better ways for emissions reductions and preserve  full sovereign discretion.

She identified the key elements in constructing reporting,  verification and accountability systems as: promoting  measurements to design systems that encourage quality,  integrity, fungibility, consistent rules that do not change  radically without prior notice, and transparency. She addressed  types of verification in general and as required for the  Protocol, and noted that self-verification or verification  through market systems such as ISO 14000 were insufficient, as  the Protocol will require independent verification of total  emissions performance.

She detailed accountability rules whereby a country that exceeds  its assigned amounts can: have deductions made from the next  budget year; have automatic mandatory discounting of all non- tendered assigned amount units (AAUs) transferred; or Parties  can meet and decide on a penalty for the non-complying country.

Question and Answer Session: The discussions centered on the  feasibility of accountability rules for non-complying parties,  the time lag in provision of emissions information, crediting of  early action schemes and the applicability of experiences drawn  from emissions trading in SO2 reduction.

One participant noted the difficulty of reporting national  emissions in the absence of a mechanism that retires a portion  of assigned amounts on a regular basis, or without considering  buyer liability to encourage countries to purchase carefully. He  questioned the value of such reports considering that emissions  data comes two years after the year in question and possibly  after the budget period is over. Regarding whether the  accountability rules that require deduction of excess emissions  from the second budget period, a number of participants inquired  whether the second budget period commitments would have to be  negotiated before the first budget period. In response,  attention was drawn to the fact that the Kyoto Protocol calls on  Parties to start consideration of the second budget period in  2005.

One participant said a compliance regime that is mainly based on  a system of borrowing from future commitments may reduce mutual  confidence between Parties as it would allow Parties to  indefinitely postpone emissions reductions. Another participant  stressed the need to look at compliance issues associated with  mechanisms separately from compliance with targets in the  Protocol. The problem of early crediting of activities that may  not receive COP/MOP approval was also raised. Petsonk stressed  the need for rigorous accountability of emissions and transfers  if trading is to start early.

Design Options for Emissions Trading, Including Verification,  Reporting and Accountability Issues - Panel I: Peter Bohm,  Stockholm University, focused on market power, supplementarity  and 'hot air.' He discussed whether efficient emissions trading  is threatened by market power by using a 'worst case' example,  wherein a single buyer determines all his purchases at a single  market price in a period. The buyer then withholds demand and  thus lowers the price. This results in an inefficiently small  trade volume, where the sellers lose and the buyers win. He said  that significant use of buyer or seller market power is unlikely  in continuous emissions trading among governments and that even  an attempt to exert market power was unlikely. Regarding binding  supplementarity, he noted that abandoning free trade raises the  aggregate cost for attaining the emissions reductions agreed in  Kyoto. It could also reduce Parties' willingness to make  stringent commitments for future periods and reduce the  willingness of new countries to join Annex B. On the other hand,  binding supplementarity would mean higher carbon emissions  prices in buyer countries that would stimulate the development  of new and less costly abatement techniques.

Michael Grubb, Royal Institute of International Affairs,  discussed liability, supplementarity and other issues in  emissions trading. Regarding accountability in international  emissions trading, he noted the need to separate the question of  governmental commitments from the need to include industries.  The system of accountability could work if the COP/MOP only  considers government actions and governments individually  determine how they will involve industry. The COP/MOP must make  sure the government-to-government component is valid and  credible. He said that the opponents of supplementarity, or  constraints on imports of reductions, argue that such a policy  would raise the costs of compliance in the first commitment  period. He thought the arguments for supplementarity were  stronger and stated that it encourages more consistent  leadership by richer countries, puts their emissions on  declining trajectories, and induces greater innovation. He  presented options for implementing supplementarity: establishing  a 'concrete ceiling' on the percentage of a Party's assigned  amount that can be imported; defining a non-binding guideline;  making imports conditional on the adoption of specified policies  and measures; and allowing imports related to an assessment of  aggregate impact of domestic policies and measures.

Question and Answer Session: Many of the questions focused on,  inter alia, the treatment and impact of 'hot air' on the Kyoto  Protocol process and the costs of technology. In response to  questions regarding 'hot air,' Grubb reiterated that negotiators  should consider its overall impact on the Kyoto process. He  questioned what would happen if an allocation proves to be  excessive when compared with the 'business as usual' projection  and the country's emissions had naturally decreased to 80% of  the 1990 levels. Could the country sell that 20% allowance that  was never needed? One participant questioned the assumption that prohibiting trade  in 'hot air' would result in it being banked and remaining  available. She said this incorrectly assumes that delegates  would not take this excess into account when negotiating the  second round of targets. Other participants asked: if 'hot air'  would be addressed by Protocol Article 3.6, which allows  flexibility in implementation for EIT countries; what counts as  a climate-related policy that lowers emissions and what counts  as 'hot air;' and should Parties develop a legally-agreed  definition for the concept of 'hot air.' One participant  proposed dealing with 'hot air' by allowing JI to begin early,  but beginning the actual emissions accounting in the commitment  period itself.

One participant called for a focus on the implications of  transfers and noted that, if one assumes that all offsets are  used by other Annex I Parties, the transfers would amount to  about US$40 billion a year and would exceed four times the  current level of FDI. Grubb noted the importance of numbers for  providing a quantitative perspective, but cautioned against  relying heavily on them since the models need further work. He  noted there was a possibility that the costs may turn out to be  much lower than indicated by the models and said the history of  energy forecasting has been unreliable.

Design options for emissions trading, including verification,  reporting, accountability and liability issues - Panel II: In  his presentation 'Registries - A basic building block for the  success of the Kyoto Protocol,' Edward Helm, Center for Clean  Air Policy, detailed the use of data reviews, expert reviews and  inventories in keeping track of all transactions between  Parties, between legal entities, and between entities and  Parties. He stressed that these were basic, technical and non- controversial elements of the Protocol monitoring and compliance  system that can track and provide information on AAU transfers,  regardless of what system of emissions reduction a country or  the COP chooses.

He described the working of the registry and noted that it  provides public information to facilitate and increase the  integrity of trading and help minimize compliance costs.  He  distinguished between compliance accounts for those liable to  meet targets with given allowances and general accounts for  brokers who have no liabilities but hold allowances for  companies or are involved in trading transactions. Regarding who  will operate the registries, he said that a secretariat or  private contractor would operate a single international  computerized registry. He stressed the need for consistency and  compatibility between all the registry systems. In conclusion,  he underscored the importance of registries in facilitating the  development of emissions markets by: providing evidence that a  seller has AAUs for sale; identifying who has AAUs; indicating  the level of trading activity; and encouraging the development  of better data systems.

Frank Joshua, UNCTAD, presented an overview of the 'Plurilateral  GHG Emissions Trading System' project. The aim of the project is  to promote consistency between domestic trading programmes with  the international emissions trading system by enabling sharing  of experiences on relevant international aspects of emissions  trading programmes, strengthening coordination among domestic  emissions trading programmes and providing training and capacity  building. He stressed the need for coherence and consistency in  the way domestic programmes evolve and the work of the COP. He  identified three approaches to GHG emissions trading: the  multilateral approach; the bilateral approach, based on the  establishment of a series of domestic programmes in a number of  countries and on related bilateral trading agreements; and the  commercial approach based on private commercial agreements. He  said that it was essential to understand the links between  domestic programmes and how they might affect the multilateral  system. He stated that the challenge to be addressed in the  UNCTAD project is to identify the key international aspects of  domestic emissions trading systems.

Question and Answer Session: Discussions centered on the  expected outputs of the UNCTAD project, the implications of  domestic emissions regimes on the design of an international  emissions trading system and the inclusion of pricing  information in registries. One participant sought clarification  on the use of the results. Joshua said these are meant to  facilitate the negotiation process and would be made available  to governments to use as they wish.

Regarding registries, participants inquired about the reason for  not including information on prices noting that such information  may be advantageous to governments. In response, Helm stated  that governments may choose to include pricing information.  Another participant said that choosing not to provide pricing  information could conceal situations whereby governments provide  subsidies under the cover of emissions reduction. It was  mentioned that prices may not be transparent where there is  devolution in terms of trading and, that even if disclosed,  uncertainty will remain as to the whether they represent the  actual prices.

Design options for emissions trading, including verification,  reporting, accountability and liability issues - Panel III: Nick  Aldridge, International Petroleum Exchange (IPE), focused on the  role, features and benefits of exchanges, which he defined as  'safe places' that trade standard contracts. For emissions  trading, they could, inter alia, define the carbon unit and  permit, how it will be delivered and how rights are transferred.  There are two types of trading: open outcry, which involves  face-to-face trades; and electronic trading, which is conducted  over computer networks and allows a far wider audience to access  the market. Exchanges are 'safe' because most are regulated by  law and can employ sanctions, such as fines and suspension of  trading rights. Exchanges can be used to trade futures and  options, as well as spot transactions (such as power exchanges  and natural gas hubs) and can also provide price risk management  and trading. The benefits of exchanges include risk management,  price discovery, supply pricing flexibility, liquidity and no  counter party risk. It also offers global access, which would be  important for emissions trading and imposes no barriers to  entry. He stated that as soon as a framework is established, IPE  would launch emissions futures.

Garth Edwards, Natsource, discussed the role of the broker in  emissions trading. The broker matches the buyer and seller, and  finds the right price, quantity and settlement terms for counter  parties. The broker also develops a transaction structure that  reduces price risk and helps capture opportunity. Regarding the  market for GHG emissions, Edwards said there are an increasing  number of transactions and major portfolios being developed. He  said that GHG transactions are essentially an insurance policy  for emitters. He described the current state of GHG trading  activity including North American transactions and portfolio  building and internal trading by BP, Royal Dutch Shell and  others. Current sellers, from Annex B, include companies engaged  in landfill/coal mine methane capture, fuel switching or re- powering, capacity upgrades and plant efficiency improvements.  Other sellers include CDM projects related to forest  sequestration and renewable energy and JI projects. Current bids  to buy are from Annex B emitters, such as power generators and  marketers, chemical industries, steel, metal and cement  producers.

Question and Answer Session: Discussion centered on buyer and  seller liability, the nature and origin of credits that will be  traded and the range of contingencies involved in transactions.  Regarding Annex B offers to sell, one participant asked what  basis they had for 'putting credits out for sale.' Edwards  clarified that what is being bought is the right to claim credit  at a later stage. Credits are sold in anticipation of an  assigned amount by a government. Some producers predict they  will not be exempt from having to make reductions. Others may  think that they have a strong claim to credits to offer. One  participant asked for clarification as to what would be  exchanged: emissions allowances in the context of Article 17  and/or credits generated under CDM and JI projects. She noted  that buyer liability is written into Article 6 of the Protocol  and added that buyers will have uncertainty as to whether the  Party from whom credit is bought will be in compliance at the  end of the commitment period. Another participant recommended  re-reading the Protocol, because it consistently refers to  commitments, which are obligations to be fulfilled at some point  in the future.

One participant asked whether buyer liability increases the  transaction costs, if it would create a disincentive to trade  and whether markets could deal with uncertainties at an  acceptable cost. Aldridge replied that if the international  process results in a 'buyer beware' situation, buyers would not  trade. Edwards expected buyers to trade on such a basis, but  said the process would become more complicated. Many  participants questioned whether buyer liability would deter  trading and debated whether all traders systemically incur  liability when engaging in a foreign transaction. Aldridge noted  that much trading is done anonymously, but said that a company  with poor credit limits and consistent defaults would not be  allowed to trade at an exchange. It was noted that several  countries have had serious economic problems this year, but  because the sovereign debt is weaker, it does not add to the  transaction costs when trading in debts. Edwards noted that in a  perfect world the price would not increase, but that GHG markets  are not the same as debt markets. Currently, the GHG buyer has  to spend a lot of time investigating the product, whereas with  debt such information can be found easily.

Special Session on registries for emissions trading: Peter  Also, New Zealand Ministry of Commerce, and Jennifer Macedonia,  US EPA, outlined a possible GHG registry and discussed its  background, purpose and system design. The registry would keep  track of adjustments to initial assigned amounts in order to  determine compliance at the end of the commitment period. It  would also provide publicly accessible information to facilitate  and maintain integrity of trading and promote transparency. The  basic structure would employ a computer database that contains  accounts for all holdings of: assigned amount acquired or  transferred through emissions trading; CERs generated from CDM  projects; ERUs acquired or transferred through joint  implementation; and increases or decreases of carbon stocks. A  tradable unit would be one metric tonne of CO2 equivalent  emissions with a unique serial number. There would be at least  one account for the Party's holding at the government level. The  registry would track official changes to the holdings. The  experts also presented a registry prototype that illustrated how  an entity-to-entity transfer would work.

### QUESTION AND ANSWER SESSION

When asked how the registry would  reconcile the changes that occur on stock exchanges, the experts  replied that each transaction would have to be processed through  national registries. They also noted that if an ERU is created,  an AAU would have to be subtracted. Questions were also raised  regarding the level of transparency, whether information on  implementation would be included, how to track forward trades,  and the need for a global registry.

Proposals from Parties on Technological and Methodological  Issues: CHINA stated that the transfer of emissions reductions  under Article 17: does not bestow rights or entitlements to  Annex B Parties; should be supplemental to domestic actions for  the purpose of meeting quantified emissions reduction  commitments; should be conducted between and among Parties  included in Annex B; and will bring about real and measurable  benefits related to the mitigation of climate change. He said  that transfers could be affected through a bilateral and  multilateral arrangement between and among Parties without  creating a new international business transaction regime.

GERMANY, on behalf of the EU and others, said that any part of  an assigned amount transferred should correspond to the actual  emissions reductions resulting from domestic mitigation efforts.  She said that only Parties that have ratified the Kyoto Protocol  should be eligible to participate. Legal entities may be  authorized to participate in emissions trading under the  responsibility of an Annex B Party that: has established and  maintained a national system for accurate monitoring,  verification, accountability and allocation of parts of AAUs and  whose commitments will not be affected by the participation of  the entities. She highlighted the following as issues requiring  more attention: how to ensure environmental effectiveness; how  to ensure transparency, accessibility and verifiability; whether  AAUs should be retired annually; and how emissions trading can  serve as an incentive for compliance.

SOUTH AFRICA stressed the need for a certain degree of  interchangeability between the mechanisms. He reiterated that no  new structures should be set up to manage the mechanisms, noting  that existing institutions and structures are sufficient.

SWITZERLAND stressed that an emissions trading system must be as  simple as possible. She highlighted the quality of inventory  data and said the risk of overselling and fraud were central  issues in developing a system of accountability for trading. She  proposed using a post-verification trading approach because it  is the simplest, most predictable and most environmentally  credible. In a post-verification system, overselling is  impossible and there is no need for liability stipulations. This  system allows Parties to trade only the excess of assigned  emissions over actual emissions. Certificates for these excess  units could be issued annually to each Party by the Secretariat  if the Article 8 review process raised no question of  implementation related to the quality of the emissions  inventory. She said that Parties who are issued AAU certificates  could choose to retain them for ensuring compliance with their  obligations under Article 3 or trade them.

The UMBRELLA GROUP stressed the importance of defining a  standard tradable unit equivalent to one metric tonne. He stated  that Parties found not to be in compliance with obligations  under Article 5 or 7 and not maintaining a national registry may  not participate in emissions trading. He said that each Party  has the discretion to allow entities to participate in trading  with the authorizing Party responsible for the entities and for  the fulfillment of its obligations under the Protocol. With  regard to registries, he said that these should contain publicly  accessible records on holdings, transfers and acquisitions of  AAUs. On reporting, he noted the inclusion of information on  transfers and acquisitions of AAUs and any retired amounts in  the annual report to the Secretariat. Regarding the end of  commitment period, he said Parties could have an opportunity to  cure any emissions overage through the acquisition of AAUs. He  stated that there should be consistent treatment of Parties  whose emissions exceed their assigned amounts whether or not  they had engaged in emissions trading.

INDIA asked how issues relating to accountability, including  buyer and seller liability, could be discussed without first  determining rights susceptible to abuse and from which questions  of liability would emerge. He urged commencement of discussion  on the nature and scope of Article 17 to help determine rights.  He noted that the emissions limitation and reduction commitments  assigned in the Protocol do not establish entitlement to trade.  Regarding 'hot air,' he questioned how it will be reported and  verified and whether any right for selling could be attached to  it.

Discussion of proposals: In the ensuing discussion, participants  considered the model proposed by Switzerland, issues surrounding  liability, reporting periods and methodology, and whether the  trading system would be on a year-by-year or commitment period  basis. One participant asked how, in the Swiss model, both post- verification and forward trading could be allowed, and what  would happen if, when forward trade takes place, no permits  remain for the selling Party. Switzerland replied that in  addition to AAUs, CERs and ERUs would be available in the  market, and that hedging against such an event is the  responsibility of those offering forward trades. Another said  the Swiss proposal muted the liability issue, because AAUs sold  on the spot market would already be certified. One speculated  that this system would be similar to a buyer liability system  with only forward trading, but with more security for the buyer  because the validity of permits could be calculated before the  end of the budget period.

One participant noted that trading of surplus allowances would  build confidence in the trading system. He said a system of  trading surpluses would fit well with annual reporting, but  noted that data compilation can take a bit of time. Another  participant remarked that estimates of what is available for the  market must be revised at the end of the budget period.  Participants also focused on, inter alia: avoiding incentives  for Annex B countries to sell a portion of their assigned amount  that they will need for compliance; whether there should be a  body similar to the Executive Board of the CDM for emissions  trading; whether the focus on Article 17 rules distracts from  overall Protocol compliance issues; and whether Article 17  actually covers legal entities.

Working Group ON Emissions Trading: Brian Fisher (Australia) and  Ingrid Apene (Latvia) chaired the working group on emissions  trading. Participants first addressed issues related to  reporting and emissions registers, and the links to compliance.  Most speakers agreed on the importance of developing  internationally agreed guidelines and rules. It was stressed by  some that granting private entities access to registries  requires Parties to supervise such access accordingly. Others  said that if Parties focus on strong domestic compliance and  oversight, then ensuring that each legal entity is acting in  compliance might not be necessary. Regarding the linkages  between the national registries, some participants stressed that  they should be compatible, but not necessarily identical. Some  speakers focused on whether: domestic trading is within the  purview of the international registry; whether the registry is  open to public scrutiny beyond the national level; and what  happens if there is conflict with the rules drawn up by the COP  and the domestic registry rules. One participant thought the  proposals for registries called for too much information, and  suggested limiting them to adding or subtracting from the  assigned amount and covering the source of removals.

The discussion also focused on proposals from Switzerland and  EDF, who called for accountability during the budget period. EDF  proposed, as an incentive for compliance during the budget  period, that comparing assigned amounts against net emissions  would provide an indication of 'overselling.' If a Party's net  emissions exceed a certain amount of its total assigned amount  (for example, 110%), then all its AAUs transferred to others in  the past year would be discounted. If it has emitted 120% of its  assigned amount, it cannot make any more transfers at all. The  proposal would signal if a Party's total emissions in a period  were greater than the total amount available to it.

Participants asked, inter alia: could a private entity with a  trading surplus continue trading, even while its country is  behind in meeting its targets; would the proposed system require  Parties to distribute their total commitment over a five-year  period; and would Parties have to buy more emissions credits to  make up for a shortfall, rather than discount their transfers.  Other aspects discussed were whether full value would be  restored to discounted transfers if a Party comes into  compliance and whether a Party's approval should be required for  transfers by its designated entities.

Some participants supported the Swiss proposal's yearly budget  approach, noting that it provides greater environmental  guarantees and does not postpone the deflation or inflation of  units. A number of participants underscored the importance of  constructing a system that indicates Parties' progress during  the commitment period. One participant expressed concern that  the Swiss proposal in effect required Parties to make a surplus  before they could trade. Another noted that most questions of  'overselling' and liability are related to how compliance with  commitments will be addressed. Another suggested that each  country could decide how to allocate its five-year budget on an  annual basis and could deposit an instrument setting out its  plan.

Regarding 'hot air,' one Party questioned how one would verify  that these units were obtained by additional measures. Another  participant said the question was not whether the action is  additional to any that would have occurred otherwise, but  whether it reduces emissions through a domestic effort. She  sought a requirement for Parties to prove that their reductions  have been through their own efforts. Some participants  underscored the difficulty of ascribing a change in emissions  levels to any particular policy. One noted difficulties in  distinguishing what was done simply to lower emissions and what  was done for other reasons, such as lowering automobile use  through taxes to encourage rail travel, thereby also reducing  emissions. Another participant said that supplementarity was  difficult because it requires a judgement of a Party's intent.  One participant stated that if a country is not in compliance,  that would be its own problem. If an entity from that country  did not comply, that would be the problem of that entity via its  national authorities.

# CAPACITY BUILDING ON MECHANISMS

Christine Zumkeller, FCCC Secretariat, presented the draft plan  for facilitating capacity building, developed in response to  decision 7/CP.4. The plan, designed to facilitate capacity- building at the national level, aims to strengthen developing  countries' capacity to engage in CDM project activities,  facilitate EIT Parties participation and to increase the  flexibility of the mechanisms through improved transparency. She  emphasized building on existing expertise, involving industry  organizations and raising awareness of mechanisms as key issues.  Kai Schmidt, FCCC Secretariat, highlighted a project proposal  for capacity building for the Protocol mechanisms. The proposed  project calls for, inter alia, awareness raising, regional  meetings to involve stakeholders, climate change forums and  information kits. In closing, Zumkeller emphasized that the  capacity building programme is designed to feed into the  international process, respond to the needs of all stakeholders  and train people interested in the CDM.

Thomas Johansson (UNDP) highlighted UNDP's priority work on  climate change and its emphasis on capacity building for project  identification and development. Guillermo Blasco (UNIDO)  described UNIDO's technology transfer and energy efficiency work  and contributions to manuals on procedures for accreditation and  verification and guidelines for technology transfer. Regarding  the CDM, he said UNIDO aims to reduce transaction costs and  facilitate private sector investment. Ravi Sharma (UNEP)  presented an overview of UNEP's efforts to build analytical  capacity, enhance information and network capacities, and  develop guidelines for transfer of climate relevant technology.  Frank Joshua (UNCTAD) noted UNCTAD's capacity to address  economic, trade and foreign investment issues, and said UNCTAD  will carry out analytical work on the options for using CERs.

Norbert Nziramasanga (Southern Center) discussed capacity  building for determining project eligibility and promoting  transfer of technology in the context of the CDM. He said  project implementers must be able to identify requirements for  gaining access to CDM, select and develop good projects,  undertake all activities of a CDM project, and identify and  organize a project team. He said governments must have the  capacity to select projects that contribute to sustainable  development, prepare projects for the CDM market, assist in  securing financing for the non-CDM portion of projects,  negotiate CERs, and have a definition of government role in  monitoring and verification to implement this role.

Question and Answer Session: On governance of efforts, one  participant asked who decided what each organization is supposed  to do, and another asked how the COP governs the programme.  Participants also stressed that only the COP/MOP can develop  rules and thus capacity-building workshops should strive to  identify proposals and explain the basis for and the  consequences of their adoption, enabling countries to make  informed decisions in the rule-making stage. Several  participants noted that work on manuals was premature, stating  that these should wait until the CDM methodology had been agreed  upon. Blasco explained that the manuals were meant to comprise  analytical work and serve as input for decision making. One  participant emphasized the need to strengthen national focal  points and said that limited financial resources prohibit active  discussion. One participant stressed that capacity building  should not be an opportunity for individuals to sell their own  views or projects, but rather help Parties to become familiar  with issues being discussed, understand the consequences of the  options in each case and be able to make decisions that conform  to national interests.

In response to inquiries about the budget and funding for the  project, Zumkeller said the estimated budget stands at  approximately US$6 million and noted that several donors will be  approached. Participants also commented that: FCCC Secretariat  and UN agencies' activities should complement the work of other  agencies such as the World Bank; capacity building should be  demand driven and take a bottom-up approach; UNDP should assist  climate change focal points at the national level; duplication  of efforts should be avoided; and national and international  NGOs, industry and the business community should be involved in  the capacity building process. Joshua stated that UNCTAD will  not have a major role in the CDM but will complement the roles  of other institutions in areas where they have comparative  advantage.

# CONCLUDING DISCUSSION OF THE WORKSHOP

Participants offered their views on the deliberations in the  workshop and shared ideas on future work following the working  group sessions and after the discussions on capacity building.  Many participants praised the technical workshop as a step  forward in the development of the Kyoto Protocol, stating that  it had clarified a number of issues, provided a forum for  exchange of views and signaled areas where more work is needed.  One participant said the discussions had illustrated the  complexity of the mechanisms and how difficult they will be to  implement. Another participant stated that even though the  workshop focused on technical issues, politically controversial  issues such as supplementarity are inevitable and will need to  be discussed in order to come up with meaningful results. Noting  that the workshop was informal, she added that it was important  to take into consideration work done outside the formal  negotiation process.

One participant said that whereas the workshop had been useful,  it had been confined to discussions and methods and had  neglected the principles that determine the legitimacy of the  methodologies. The principles he highlighted included: the legal  character of what was being assigned; the proprietorial  implications of the AAUs; and the legal implications of the  transboundary transfers of rights. He proposed that these issues  be addressed in a future workshop.

Regarding future work, suggestions for further consideration  included, inter alia: a concrete draft on guidelines for JI;  definition and nature of the verification process; baselines and  monitoring; allocation of funds for the CDM; benchmarks;  guidelines for registries; guidelines for emissions monitoring  and calculations of emission factors; guiding principles for the  mechanisms; additionality for project-based mechanisms; and  examination of the linkages between the three Protocol  mechanisms. A proposal to organize a technical workshop to  discuss Protocol issues that relate to WTO rules was  highlighted.

A number of delegates stressed the need for common terminology  to facilitate further discussions. One participant stated that  there was a need to solicit views from a broad range of groups  to facilitate the development of technical options by the  Secretariat. He said that the review of the AIJ pilot phase  could provide an opportunity to do more work on concrete  examples. A workshop on the CDM by AOSIS countries to be held in  the Marshall Islands in July this year was announced.

In his closing statement, Chair Chow recalled that the purpose  of the workshop was to promote mutual understanding on the  issues. He noted the cordial exchange of ideas and said that he  was confident that it would facilitate progress in the  negotiations. He stated that there would be no formal  conclusions of the workshop but a report will be presented to  the Subsidiary Bodies meeting in June. Regarding further  workshops, he said that the Subsidiary Bodies will consider the  ideas and guide the Secretariat in defining further work. He  mentioned that two workshops - on Article 4.8 and 4.9 (adverse  effects) and on technology transfer - were being considered for  the second half of the year. He thanked the participants and  organizers of the workshop and closed the workshop at 1:00 p.m  on Thursday, 15 April.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR

### SECOND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON EMERGING MARKETS FOR  EMISSIONS TRADING

This conference will be held from 26-27 April  1999 in London and will be supported by UNCTAD, the UK and the  Institute of Petroleum in London. For more information contact:  Rachel Summers, Global Village Conferences, 70, Wheelhouse,  Burrells Wharf, Westferry Road, London, E14 3TA; tel: +44-171- 538-1700; fax: +44-171-538-4244; e-mail: info@emissions.co.uk

### IEA INTERNATIONAL WORKSHOP ON TECHNOLOGIES TO REDUCE GREENHOUSE  GAS EMISSIONS - ENGINEERING-ECONOMIC ANALYSES OF CONSERVED  ENERGY AND CARBON

This workshop, co-sponsored by the  International Energy Agency, the US Department of Energy and the  US Environmental Protection Agency will be held from 4-6 May  1999 in Washington, DC. For more information contact: John  Newman, International Energy Agency; tel: +33-1-40 57 67 15,  fax: +33 1 40 57 67 49, e-mail: john.newman@iea.org or Jeffery  Dowd, US Department of Energy; tel: +1-202-586-7258; fax: +1- 202-586-4447; e-mail: jeff.dowd@hq.doe.gov.

### GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY (GEF) COUNCIL MEETING

The next  Council Meeting will be held from 5-7 May 1999 in Washington,  DC, to be preceeded by the NGO Consultation on 4 May. For more  information contact: Marie Morgan, GEF Secretariat; tel: +1-202- 473-1128; fax: +1-202-522-3240; Internet: http://www.gef- web.com.

### 10TH GLOBAL WARMING INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE AND EXPO

The 10th  Global Warming International Conference and Expo will be held in  Mt. Fuji, Japan, from 5-8 May 1999. The meeting is sponsored by  the Global Warming International Center (GWIC), P.O. Box 5275,  Woodridge, IL, USA 60517-0275; tel: +1-630-910-1551; fax: +1- 630-910-1561; Internet: http://globalwarming.net/.

### FCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES

The FCCC Subsidiary Bodies will meet  from 31 May - 11 June 1999 in Bonn, Germany. Prior to COP-5,  workshops on Article 4.8 and 4.9 (adverse impacts) and  technology transfer will be held. COP-5 will be held in Bonn  from 25 October - 5 November 1999. For more information contact:  the FCCC Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815- 1999; e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.de; Internet:  http://www.unfccc.de/.

### MEETING ON PACIFIC ISLAND NATIONAL IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES AND  AOSIS MEETING ON THE CDM

The meeting on Pacific Island national  implementation strategies for climate change will be held from  12-13 July 1999 in Majuro, Marshall Islands. This will be  followed, from 14-16 July, by the Alliance of Small Island  States (AOSIS) meeting on the CDM. For more information contact:  e-mail: rmiun@aol.com.

### SECOND ANNUAL EARTH TECHNOLOGIES FORUM

The Second Annual Earth  Technologies Forum will be held in Washington, DC, from 27-29  September 1999. Hosted by the International Climate Change  Partnership and the Alliance for Responsible Atmospheric Policy,  in cooperation with the US EPA and several other organizations,  this event focuses on global climate change and ozone protection  technologies and policies. For more information contact: Erika  Fischer; tel: +1-703-807-4052; fax: +1-703-243-2874; Internet:  http://www.earthforum.com/.

### FOURTH INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS ON ENERGY, ENVIRONMENT &  TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION

The 4th International Congress on  Energy, Environment & Technological Innovation will be held from  20-24 October 1999 in Rome, Italy. Organized by 'La Sapienza'  and 'Roma Tre' Universities and the Universidad Central de  Venezuela, the Congress offers the opportunity for high-level  scientific debate and communication between participants on the  problems related to regional and urban management. For more  information contact: EETI99, Facolta di Ingegneria, Via  Eudossiana 18, 00184 Rome, Italy; fax: +39-6-4883235; Internet:  http://www.ing.ucv.ve/ceait/eeti.htm.