---
title: "SUMMARY OF THE 8TH SESSION OF WORKING GROUP III AND THE 24TH SESSION OF THE OF THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE: 22-28 SEPTEMBER 2005"
id: enb12278e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12278e
date: 2005-09-28
abstract: "The 8th session of Working Group III (WGIII-8) of the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and the 24th  session of the IPCC (IPCC-24) convened in Montreal, Canada, from  22-24 September and 26-28 September 2005, respectively. Over 220  participants representing governments and non-governmental  organizations were in attendance at each of the meetings."
---

During WGIII-8, delegates completed work on the Special Report on  Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage, approving the text of the  Summary for Policy Makers (SPM), accepting the scientific and  technical assessments underlying this Special Report, and approved  adjustments to this Special Report for consistency with the  revised SPM.

The efforts of Working Group III were acknowledged at IPCC-24,  with delegates approving their actions on the Special Report,  thereby allowing the report to proceed to the copyediting and  publication phase. Also at IPCC-24, delegates approved the draft  report of IPCC-23, and the IPCC programme and budget for 2006-08,  and discussed further work on aerosols, election procedures,  emissions scenarios, outreach activities, and admittance of  observer organizations. Delegates also heard progress reports on:  the activities of the three IPCC Working Groups; management of the  Synthesis Report of the Fourth Assessment Report; the 2006 IPCC  Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories; and the work  of the Task Group on Data and Scenario Support for Impact and  Climate Analysis. While the failure of delegates to reach  agreement on revised election procedures for the IPCC and Task  Force Bureaus at IPCC-24 was perhaps disappointing, the progress  otherwise made on substantive and procedural matters at both  WGIII-8 and IPCC-24 reflects the now well-accepted competency and  relevance of this intergovernmental body.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE IPCC

The IPCC was established in 1988 by the World Meteorological  Organization (WMO) and the United Nations Environment Programme  (UNEP). The purpose of the IPCC is to assess the scientific,  technical and socioeconomic information relevant to understanding  the risks associated with human-induced climate change. The IPCC  does not undertake new research, nor does it monitor climate- related data, but bases its assessments on published and peer- reviewed scientific and technical literature. Its Secretariat is  located in Geneva, Switzerland, and is staffed by WMO and UNEP.

Since its inception, the IPCC has prepared a series of  comprehensive assessments, special reports and technical papers,  providing scientific information on climate change to the  international community, including policy makers and the public.  This information has played an important role in the negotiations  under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  (UNFCCC). The UNFCCC, which provides an overall global policy  framework for addressing climate change, was adopted in 1992 and  entered into force in 1994.

The IPCC currently includes three working groups: Working Group I  addresses the scientific aspects of the climate system and climate  change; Working Group II addresses the vulnerability of  socioeconomic and natural systems to climate change, negative and  positive consequences of climate change, and options for adapting  to it; and Working Group III addresses options for limiting  greenhouse gas emissions and otherwise mitigating climate change.

The IPCC also has a Task Force on National Greenhouse Gas  Inventories. This Task Force oversees the IPCC National Greenhouse  Gas Inventories Programme (NGGIP), which aims to develop and  refine an internationally-agreed methodology and software for the  calculation and reporting of national greenhouse gas emissions and  removals, and to encourage the use of this methodology by  countries participating in the IPCC and by UNFCCC signatories. The  IPCC Bureau is composed of 30 members elected by the Panel,  assists the IPCC Chair in planning, coordinating and monitoring  progress in the work of the IPCC.

### KEY IPCC PRODUCTS

The IPCC completed its initial comprehensive  assessments of climate change in the First Assessment Report in  1990 and the Second Assessment Report in 1995. The IPCC's Third  Assessment Report (TAR) was completed in 2001. It addresses  policy-relevant scientific, technical, and socioeconomic  dimensions of climate change, and concentrates on findings since  1995 at both regional and global levels. The TAR, which was  subject to extensive review from experts and governments, is  composed of a comprehensive assessment from the three IPCC Working  Groups, a Summary for Policy Makers and a Technical Summary of  each Working Group report, and a Synthesis Report. The TAR  Synthesis Report is written in a non-technical style aimed at  policy makers and addresses nine policy-relevant questions  identified by the IPCC based on submissions by governments.  The IPCC's Fourth Assessment Report (AR4) is due to be released  in 2007.

Since 1991, the IPCC has also worked on technical guidelines for  assessing greenhouse gas inventories. The IPCC Guidelines for  National Greenhouse Gas Inventories were first released in 1994,  and a revised set was released in 1996. The UNFCCC's 1997 Kyoto  Protocol reaffirmed the use of the IPCC's guidelines for preparing  national greenhouse gas inventories by Parties to the UNFCCC and,  in the future, by Parties to the Kyoto Protocol. In 2000 and 2003,  the Panel approved additional good practice guidance reports that  complement the Revised 1996 Guidelines and, also in 2003, approved  a process for producing a further revised set of Guidelines in  early 2006.

### NINETEENTH SESSION

Beginning at its nineteenth session, held from  17-20 April 2002, in Geneva, Switzerland, the IPCC began work on  the AR4. Participants made a number of decisions, including in  relation to a draft work plan for developing definitions for  forest degradation and devegetation, methodological options for  recording and reporting on emissions from these activities, and  aspects of the procedures for agreeing on NGGIP products.  Participants also decided: on the timing of the AR4; to hold a  workshop on geological and oceanic carbon dioxide separation,  capture and storage; to draft a scoping paper on climate change  and water; and to hold an expert meeting on climate change and  development.

### TWENTIETH SESSION

IPCC-20 was held from 19-21 February 2003, in  Paris, France. Participants agreed on a work plan for two expert  'scoping meetings' on how to structure the AR4. They also  discussed a framework and a set of criteria for establishing  priorities for special reports, methodology reports and technical  papers for the period of the fourth assessment. They also decided  to hold a high-level scientific meeting to survey the processes  affecting terrestrial carbon stocks and human influences upon  them, and to produce two special reports: one on safeguarding the  ozone layer and the global climate system; and the other on carbon  dioxide capture and storage.

### TWENTY-FIRST SESSION

At IPCC-21, held from 3-7 November 2003, in  Vienna, Austria, participants reviewed the outlines of the  proposed Working Group contributions to the AR4 and the Chair's  proposal for an AR4 Synthesis Report. Participants agreed that a  technical paper on climate change and water should be completed in  2007, discussed terms of reference for a document on the AR4  product set, and reviewed the report of the IPCC expert meeting on  processes affecting terrestrial carbon stocks and human influences  upon them. The IPCC also approved the terms of reference for the  revision of the Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National  Greenhouse Gas Inventories, and agreed on a revised mandate, and  changed the name of the Task Group on Scenarios for Climate and  Impact Assessment to Task Group on Data and Scenarios Support for  Impact and Climate Analysis (TGICA).

### TWENTY-SECOND SESSION

IPCC-22 convened from 9-11 November 2004,  in New Delhi, India. Participants discussed the scope, content and  process for an AR4 Synthesis Report, AR4 products, outreach, the  IPCC programme and budget for 2005-08; and election procedures.  Participants also heard progress reports on: Working Group  contributions to the AR4; the Special Report on Safeguarding the  Ozone Layer and the Global Climate System; the Carbon Capture and  Storage Special Report; the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National  Greenhouse Gas Inventories; and the work of the TGICA. The Panel  adopted a decision on the IPCC programme and budget for 2005-08  and agreed to work towards a 30-page AR4 Synthesis Report with a  five-page SPM to be approved by the IPCC in late October 2007. The  Panel also discussed activities for IPCC products.

### TWENTY-THIRD SESSION

IPCC-23 was convened on 8 April 2005, in  Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, to consider the joint activities of Working  Groups I and II on the Special Report on Safeguarding the Ozone  Layer and the Global Climate System. The Panel accepted this  Special Report along with a SPM. In adopting the draft report of  IPCC-22, participants also agreed that the IPCC Bureau would  further consider arrangements for management of the AR4 Synthesis  Report and report on its progress to the IPCC.

# WGIII-8 REPORT

The eighth session of Working Group III of the IPCC (WGIII-8)  opened on Thursday, 22 September 2005, co-chaired by WG III  Co-Chairs, Bert Metz (the Netherlands) and Ogunlade Davidson  (Sierra Leone). Delegates met in plenary, as well as in several  informal contact groups, to consider the text of the draft SPM of  the Special Report on Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage (CCS  Special Report), and to approve the scientific and technical  assessments underlying the CCS Special Report and the adjustments  to the CCS Special Report for consistency with the revised SPM.  At the opening plenary on Thursday, IPCC Chair Rajendra Pachauri  (India) noted the high expectations for the CCS Special Report,  as this is the first time that a comprehensive assessment of CCS  has been undertaken. He highlighted that the drafting process  included participation from industry and civil society, and  emphasized the need to ensure outreach efforts on the CCS Special  Report. This report outlines the key deliberations over the CCS  Special Report at WGIII-8.

# PRESENTATION ON THE DRAFT SUMMARY FOR POLICY MAKERS

Co-Chairs Davidson and Metz presented highlights of the draft SPM,  focusing on issues that attracted comments from governments and  organizations during the consultation period for the draft SPM. A  document of collated comments was distributed (8th WG III/INF. 1).  Co-Chair Davidson reminded delegates that the SPM aims to cover  key issues relevant to decision makers but that it does not  include policy recommendations. Discussing the current status of  CCS technology, he noted the difficulty of defining the maturity  of CCS system components, and explained that the SPM classifies  CCS technologies into four 'phases' of maturity: those in the  research phase; those in the demonstration phase; those that are  economically feasible under certain conditions; and those that  have a mature market.

On CO2 storage opportunities, Co-Chair Metz noted that the figure  of 2,000 Gt of CO2 for geological storage was derived from an  expert judgment, and that technical estimates for ocean and  mineral carbonation cannot be made yet. On the economic potential  of CCS, he explained that, as practical experience with CCS  remains limited, scenario studies were applied to consider  economic potentialities. Discussing local health, safety and  environmental risks associated with CCS, Co-Chair Metz noted that  risks from transporting CO2 via pipelines would be comparable to  those associated with hydrocarbon pipelines, while the risks for  CO2 storage could be comparable with natural gas storage. He also  said that ocean storage could have significant risks, but that  there is insufficient information on ecosystem impacts. Co-Chair  Metz explained that the risks of mineral carbonation would be  those related to the environmental impacts of mining operations  and that the figures provided in the SPM on the consequences of  leakage from CO2 storage are indicative only. On the implications  of CCS for emissions inventories and accounting, he said the 2006  IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (2006  Guidelines) are expected to include guidance on the incorporation  of CCS in national inventories.

# CONSIDERATION OF THE DRAFT SUMMARY FOR POLICY MAKERS

The main agenda item at WGIII-8 was consideration of the draft SPM  of the CCS Special Report (8th WG III/Doc. 2a). Delegates  addressed this issue in plenary from Thursday to Saturday,  including during late night sessions on Friday and Saturday. In  introducing the draft text of the SPM, as revised based on  comments from governments and organizations, Co-Chair Metz noted  that nearly 800 comments were received on the draft SPM, the final  version would include a glossary, and highly technical or policy  prescriptive information should be avoided. He also said the WG  III Co-Chairs would prepare a foreword clarifying the scope of  the SPM.

Delegates then began consideration of the text, following a  standard format throughout the meeting. The Co-Chairs first  introduced each paragraph, explaining why comments by countries  and organizations were or were not incorporated, and then  delegates discussed and agreed to that paragraph on a line-by-line  basis. This report discusses each section of the SPM, outlining  the key issues debated at WGIII-8, and providing a brief summary  of the final text of each section.

What is CO2 capture and storage and how could it contribute to  mitigating climate change? This section of the SPM was first  addressed in plenary on Thursday and again on Saturday, following  informal contact group consultations. Discussions centered on two  key issues: whether CCS 'is' or 'could' be a mitigation option;  and whether to include references to TAR on the need to avoid  substantive amounts of CO2.

France, Switzerland, Germany, Zambia, Austria and others  supported stating that CCS 'could be' a mitigation option, while  Saudi Arabia, Australia, and the US expressed a preference for  stating that CCS 'is' a mitigation option. China questioned the  necessity of including language from the TAR that notes that,  depending on the assumed baseline emissions and stabilization of  greenhouse gas concentrations over the 21st century, substantial  amounts of CO2 emissions would need to be avoided.

###     Final Text

The final text notes that the SPM considers CCS to be  an option in the portfolio of mitigation actions for stabilization  of atmospheric greenhouse gas emissions, and that the TAR  indicates that no single technology option will provide all of the  emission reductions needed to achieve stabilization, but that a  portfolio of mitigation measures will be needed.

###     What are the characteristics of CCS?

Delegates considered this  section of the SPM on Thursday. After initial discussions on  whether to modify the title to specify that CCS is relevant to  'large,' 'anthropogenic,' or 'suitable' sources of CO2, delegates  agreed to leave the title unchanged.

Discussions on the text in this section first centered on what can  be categorized as 'large point sources' and the potential for CO2  storage in geothermal sites and aquifers. France noted that deep  aquifers could be used for CO2 storage and other purposes  concurrently. Discussions then shifted to leakage from the  transportation of CO2 and a proposal by Denmark to include  specific reference to biomass. The US, opposed by Germany and  Austria, proposed deleting reference to leakage from the transport  of CO2 as a factor in the net reduction of emissions through CCS,  saying that its impact is minor. Agreement was reached on text  referring to 'any leakage from transport.' Final Text: The final text notes that capture of CO2 can be  applied to large point sources. The CO2 would then be compressed  and transported for storage in geological formations, the ocean,  or mineral carbonates, or for use in industrial processes. It also  states that the net reduction of emissions from CCS depends on the  fraction of CO2 captured, the increase in CO2 production arising  from any additional energy required for CCS, any leakage from  transport, and the fraction of CO2 retained in storage over the  long term.

###     What is the current status of CCS technology?

This question was  addressed in plenary on Friday. The main issues under discussion  were whether the potential for environmental risks from ocean  storage should be noted in this section, and whether the early  state of technological development on ocean storage is adequately  reflected in the text. Belgium, Denmark, France and Germany  supported some reference to risks, while Japan, Kenya and Saudi  Arabia suggested this was not necessary since risks are addressed  in another section of the SPM. Delegates also discussed: the  process and time scale of equilibration between CO2 in the ocean  and the atmosphere; whether and how to refer to Enhanced Oil  Recovery in industrial uses of CO2; and references to the maturity  of CCS system components. Changes made to the draft SPM included:  referring to contaminants rather than to hydrogen sulphide;  emphasizing caprock as an essential mechanism for trapping CO2;  and including a footnote to explain that CO2 contained in  unminable coal, if subsequently mined, would be released.

###     Final Text

The final text describes types of CO2 capture systems;  explains means of transporting CO2 according to the distance and  amount to be transported; and notes relevant technologies for CO2  storage in both deep geological formations and in the ocean floor,  noting that ocean storage and its ecological impacts are still in  the research phase. The text also addresses the production of  stable carbonates and certain applications in using waste stream;  states that the abatement potential of industrial uses of captured  CO2 is small; and describes the various stages of development of  CCS components, noting that the maturity of the overall system may  be less than some of its components.

What is the geographical relationship between the sources and  storage opportunities for CO2? This question was addressed in  plenary and in an informal contact group meeting on Friday. Main  issues under discussion included whether to indicate that most of  the increase in large point sources of emissions is expected to  occur in developing countries, and the geographical relationship  between CO2 emission sources and sedimentary basins with potential  for geological storage. Delegates also discussed: regional  distribution, technology maturity and locations for deep ocean  storage; percentages of global CO2 emissions from fossil fuel  suitable for storage and capture; and the proximity of large point  sources of emissions to potential storage sites.

###     Final Text

The final text states that large point sources of CO2  are concentrated close to major industrial and urban areas, many  of them within 300 km of potential geological storage sites, and  that preliminary research suggests that, globally, a small  proportion of large point sources are close to potential ocean  storage locations. The SPM also notes that CCS enables the control  of CO2 emissions from the fossil fuel-based production of  electricity or hydrogen, which in the longer term, could partially  reduce CO2 emissions from transport and distributed energy supply  systems. Two figures are included: one representing the global  distribution of large stationary sources of CO2; and one  representing prospective sedimentary basin areas with storage  potential. The caption for the latter figure explains that the  representation is based on partial and changing information that  varies from region to region.

What are the costs for CCS and what is the technical and economic  potential? This issue was taken up in plenary on Friday and  Saturday. Discussions centered on: the minimum carbon prices  necessary for a major CCS contribution to mitigation; worldwide  storage capacity in geological formations; the contribution of CCS  as part of a mitigation portfolio; the meaning of the word 'cost;'  and the economic potential of CCS under different stabilization  scenarios and in a least-cost mitigation portfolio. After the US  expressed concern about text being policy prescriptive, delegates  agreed to amend the text to note that models indicate that the  major contribution of CCS to climate change mitigation would come  from deployment in the energy sector. China proposed deleting a  figure that shows the contribution of CCS as part of a mitigation  portfolio since it only referred to two scenario studies for  stabilization at 550 ppmv CO2, while Germany, Austria, and Kenya  highlighted the relevance of the figure and supported keeping it.  After informal consultations, delegates agreed to add text noting  that analyses in this field are limited. They also agreed to  modify the figure, and to note that results vary considerably on  regional scales and that the example in the figure is based on a  single stabilization scenario and does not show the full range of  uncertainties associated with these matters. Several other changes  were made to the text to note the lack of literature and need for  further assessment.

###     Final Text

The final text:describes and elaborates on cost increases in electricity  generation associated with the use of CCS in electricity  production; explains that retrofitting existing plants with CO2 capture  is expected to lead to higher costs and lower efficiencies than  for newly built power plants with capture; states that in most CCS systems, the cost of capture is the  largest cost component; and notes that energy and economic models indicate that the  major contribution of CCS systems to climate change mitigation  would come from deployment in the electricity sector, with most  modeling suggesting that CCS systems start to deploy at a  significant level when CO2 prices begin to reach approximately  US$25-30 per ton of CO2.

The text further notes that: it is likely that, worldwide, there  is a technical potential of at least about 2,000 Gt CO2 of storage  capacity in geological formations; the economic potential of CCS  averaged over a range of baseline scenarios would mean that CCS  contributes 15 to 55% to the cumulative mitigation effort  worldwide until 2100, although uncertainties in these economic  potential estimates are significant; and the role of CCS in  mitigation portfolios increases and is found to reduce  stabilization costs over the course of the century in most  scenarios. The section title includes a footnote explaining that  costs, as used in the SPM, refer only to market prices and do not  include external costs such as environmental and societal costs  that may be associated to the use of CCS.

###     What are the local health, safety and environment risks of CCS?

Delegates took up this section of the SPM in plenary on Saturday.  Discussions centered on the health and safety risks of the  geological storage and transportation of CO2, and on the  environmental impacts of ocean storage. On risks to human health  and safety, delegates considered comparisons between risks in the  transportation and storage of CO2 and risks in the natural gas  industry. On the environmental risks of ocean storage, discussions  focused on the availability of scientific knowledge and on the  extent of ocean storage impacts.

###     Final Text

The final text states, inter alia, that:the local risks associated with CO2 pipelines could be  similar or lower than those posed by existing hydrocarbon  pipelines; the risks of geological storage would be comparable to those  of natural gas storage with the appropriate measures; the effects of CO2 on marine organisms will have ecosystem  consequences; the chronic effects of CO2 injection into oceans have not yet  been studied over large ocean areas and long time scales; and the environmental impacts of large-scale mineral carbonation  would be a consequence of the required mining and disposal of the  resulting products.

Will physical leakage of stored CO2 compromise CCS as a climate  mitigation option? Delegates took up this section of the SPM,  which was previously titled 'What are the global risks of CCS?' in  plenary and in an informal contact group on Saturday. Discussions  centered on the differences between geological and ocean storage,  particularly in relation to retention times, and on the extent of  knowledge on leakage from storage sites.

###     Final Text

The final text states, inter alia, that: the fraction  of CO2 retained in appropriately selected and managed geological  reservoirs is likely to exceed 99% over 1,000 years; the release  of CO2 from ocean storage would be gradual over hundreds of years;  and if continuous leakage of CO2 occurs, it could, at least in  part, offset the benefits of CCS for mitigating climate change.

What are the legal and regulatory issues for implementing CO2  storage? Delegates took up this section of the SPM in plenary on  Saturday. On regulations that may be applicable to geological  storage, discussions centered on the need to indicate that the  list of regulations provided is non-exhaustive, and on the  inclusion of reference to pollution controls in the list.  Regarding CO2 injection into the ocean or sub-seabed, discussions  focused on the interpretation, evolution and applicability of  international law. Delegates also considered a proposal by the  Netherlands to include reference to cross-border geological  storage, deletion of a reference to the UN Convention on the Law  of the Sea, as proposed by the US, and Japan's proposal to delete  text elaborating on the OSPAR and London Conventions.

###     Final Text

The final text:provides a non-exhaustive list of regulations for operations  in the subsurface that may be applicable to geological storage; states that long-term liability issues associated with CO2  leakage and local environmental impacts are unresolved; notes that no formal interpretations exist on the  compatibility of CO2 injection into the sub-seabed or ocean with  certain provisions of international law; and states that several treaties, notably the London and OSPAR  Conventions, are potentially applicable.

What are the implications of CCS for emission inventories and  accounting? Delegates took up this section of the SPM in plenary  on Saturday. Discussions centered on the inclusion of CCS  accounting under the IPCC Guidelines and on whether to include  reference to the uncertain role of CCS under the Kyoto Protocol.  Delegates agreed to remove reference to the Kyoto Protocol from  the final text.

###     Final Text

The final text states that the current IPCC Guidelines  do not provide specific methods for estimating emissions  associated with CCS, and that such methods are expected to be  provided in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas  Inventories. It states that specific methods may be needed for net  capture and storage, negative emissions associated with biomass,  physical leakage, and fugitive emissions. The text also makes  reference to the limited experience of leakage monitoring and  reporting, and the need to account for future and cross-border  storage.

###     What about public perception of CCS?

Delegates took up this  section of the SPM in plenary on Saturday. The US, with support  from New Zealand, Australia, and many others, proposed to delete  this section, since it contrasts with the other sections of the  SPM, which are based on more technical data. Delegates agreed to  delete the section.

###     What are the gaps in knowledge?

Delegates considered this issue  in plenary on Saturday. Austria, with support from Germany,  Belgium, and several others, proposed the addition of a section  that would indicate to policy makers that there are gaps in  knowledge about CCS.

###     Final Text

The final text notes that there are gaps in knowledge  on some aspects of CCS. It also states that increasing knowledge  and experience would reduce uncertainties and facilitate decision  making on the deployment of CCS for climate change mitigation.

# CLOSING PLENARY

At the final plenary session, which ran into the early hours of  Sunday, 25 September, delegates approved the revised draft SPM  (8th WG III/Doc. 2a, Rev. 1), the Adjustments to the Technical  Summary and Chapters for consistency with the approved SPM (8th WG  III/Doc. 2c), and the Underlying Scientific and Technical  Assessment in the Special Report (8th WG III/Doc. 2b). WG III  agreed to pass on its best wishes to the family of the late Dr.  David Pearce. Co-Chair Metz closed the meeting at 1:15 am.

# IPCC-24 REPORT

IPCC-24 opened on Monday, 26 September 2005. During the three-day  meeting, delegates met in plenary and in contact groups to make  progress on the agenda items, including: adoption of the IPCC-23  draft report; approval of the CCS Special Report, and the IPCC  programme and budget for 2006-08; and discussions of other issues,  such as aerosols, emission scenarios, election procedures,  admission of observer organizations to the IPCC, outreach, and  progress on other IPCC activities.

IPCC Chair Rajendra Pachauri (India) welcomed delegates. Stéphane  Dion, Minister of the Environment, Canada, remarked on the  importance and influence of the IPCC's work and suggested the  Panel turn its attention to adaptation. He noted the relevance of  the CCS Special Report given Canada's current and planned use of  CCS, and stressed the importance of issues such as adaptation,  carbon markets, and technology to a successful outcome at the  Climate Change Conference in Montreal in November 2005.

Referring to the IPCC-24 agenda, Chair Pachauri noted that work on  the AR4 is at a critical juncture, and highlighted the policy  relevance of cross-cutting themes in the AR4. He emphasized  outreach and financial support as key to the work of the IPCC in  the future. UNEP Executive Director Klaus Töpfer stressed the  importance of the CCS Special Report, given its importance in  addressing climate change. He referred to UNEP's commitment to the  IPCC, and said that, in cooperation with the WMO, UNEP could help  to disseminate the findings of the AR4.

WMO Deputy Secretary-General Hong Yan highlighted the importance  of the recent Special Report on Safeguarding the Ozone Layer and  the Global Climate System, and encouraged the IPCC to work with  WMO members to distribute it. He also noted that work on future  emission scenarios should include consideration of broader  socioeconomic conditions, and that different approaches might be  required when addressing short and long-term scenarios. Halldor  Thorgeirsson, UNFCCC Secretariat, noted the relevance of IPCC  special reports and the AR4 to policy making, and the importance  of effective and balanced outreach activities by the IPCC. He also  told delegates that the UNFCCC Subsidiary Body on Implementation  had forwarded a proposal to COP-11 for a three-week postponement  of COP-13, to allow further time for preparation of the AR4  Synthesis Report.

Delegates approved the provisional agenda for IPCC-24 (IPCC-XXIV/ Doc. 1, Rev. 1). IPCC Secretary Renate Christ then introduced  the draft report of IPCC-23, noting that only minor, editorial  comments were received (IPCC-XXIV/Doc. 3). The report was then  approved by delegates without comment.

# APPROVAL OF WGIII-8 ACTIONS

WG III Co-Chair Ogunlade Davidson (Sierra Leone) introduced the  SPM of the CCS Special Report (IPCC-XXIV/Doc. 2a) and the  Underlying Scientific and Technical Assessment in the Special  Report (IPCC-XXIV/Doc. 2b). WG III Co-Chair Bert Metz (the  Netherlands) noted that constructive contributions during WGIII-8  had improved the SPM. Delegates then approved the actions of  WGIII-8. The following discussions centered on the importance of  outreach regarding the CCS Special Report and IPCC Secretary  Christ informed delegates of outreach activities already underway.

Germany, with support from many countries and Greenpeace, and  opposed by Saudi Arabia, suggested the IPCC consider preparing a  special report on renewable energy and energy efficiency. Some  countries said that given the timing and substance of the AR4, the  IPCC guidelines for the commencement of special reports, and  resource constraints, it was not appropriate to consider such a  special report at this time. Chair Pachauri agreed that due to  timing and capacity constraints relating to the AR4, consideration  of such a special report should wait until the release of the AR4.  No further action was taken.

# IPCC PROGRAMME AND BUDGET FOR 2006-08

This issue was first addressed in plenary on Monday. IPCC  Secretary Christ presented the programme and budget for 2006-08  (IPCC-XXIV/Doc. 4), noting that the annual rate of contributions  for recent years was around, or slightly above, annual  expenditures, but below the annual budget approved by the Panel.  Chair Pachauri urged delegations to step up revenue flows.

Marc Gillet (France) and Zhenlin Chen (China) co-chaired meetings  of the Financial Task Team, which met twice on Monday, and once on  Tuesday. Discussions centered on: reasons for the budgetary carry  over, which include cancellation, postponement, and back-to-back  scheduling of some meetings, and contributions to meeting costs by  host countries; incorporating plenary decisions in the 2006  budget, including increased funding for outreach, subject to  approval at IPCC-25; and requests for budgetary adjustments from  Technical Support Units (TSU) and other IPCC groups based on their  revised meeting plans. Switzerland, Germany, and several others  requested additional information on specific budgetary items,  while the UK, Germany, and others noted that governments need  guidance on required contributions.

###     Final Decision

In addition to approving the programme and budget  for 2006-08, the Panel also: took into account the carry over from  2004, noting that CHF5.5 million is estimated as the averaged  yearly total of contributions needed for sufficient carry over to  ensure transition to the next assessment period; adopted the  revised budget for 2006; took note of the forecast budget for 2007  and of the indicative budgets for 2008; and invited governments  that may be in a position to do so to contribute to the IPCC Trust  Fund.

# PROGRESS REPORTS

Progress reports were considered in plenary on Monday on: the  activities of Working Groups I, II and III; management of the AR4  Synthesis Report; and the work of the Task Group on Data and  Scenario Support for Impact and Climate Assessment (TGICA)

### WG I

Susan Solomon (US), WG I Co-Chair, presented the WG I  Progress Report (IPCC-XXIV/Doc. 8), noting that the Second Lead  Author meeting took place in Beijing, China, from 10-12 May 2005,  and that the first order drafts of all chapters of the WG I report  had been received. She explained that an extensive list of  potential expert reviewers had been compiled from various sources,  including a publicly available web page to allow for open  registration, and that initial contact had been made with more  than 1,000 potential reviewers, with over 400 now confirmed.  Co-Chair Solomon further announced that that the Uncertainty  Guidance Note for authors is available on the IPCC website, and  that the Ozone Special Report is being printed.

### WG II

WG II Co-Chair Osvaldo Canziani (Argentina) presented the  WG II Progress Report (IPCC-XXIV/Doc. 14), noting the submission  of the WG II first order draft and the commencement of its expert  review, and the initial drafting of the Technical Summary and the  SPM. He highlighted the development of a regional database on  source material used in the WG II fourth assessment, and plans for  a joint meeting at COP-11 of WG II and WG III on the cross-cutting  issue of adaptation, mitigation and sustainable development. Given  time constraints related to preparation of the AR4 and the  importance of the subject matter, Co-Chair Canziani requested, and  delegates agreed, to postpone delivery of the IPCC Technical Paper  on Water for six months.

### WG III

WG III Co-Chair Metz presented the WG III Progress Report  (IPCC-XXIV/Doc. 12), noting that the author team is preparing the  first order draft of WG III's portion of the AR4 for expert review  from 28 November 2005 to 20 January 2006, and that comments  received during the expert review will be discussed during the  Third Lead Author meeting, in Beijing, China, in February 2006.  Co-Chair Metz highlighted an expert meeting in Washington, D.C.,  US, in January 2005, on emission scenarios used in the AR4, and a  workshop in Laxenburg, Austria, in June 2005, on new emission  scenarios. Co-Chair Metz also explained that, to further ensure  discussions and coordination between WG II and WG III on the  cross-cutting issue of adaptation, mitigation and sustainable  development, a web-based Virtual Coordination Group had been  created, and expressed hope that the CCS Special Report will be  released by the end of 2005.

###     AR4 Synthesis Report

Chair Pachauri informed delegates of the  arrangements for management of the AR4 Synthesis Report, which  include a draft timetable, roles and responsibilities of IPCC  members and units, and organization of the AR4 Synthesis Report  TSU; and of the budgetary impacts of the AR4 Synthesis Report,  which are estimated to be CHF634,000 (IPCC-XXIV/INF. 2).

On a question from Slovenia about the content and form of the  AR4 Synthesis Report, Chair Pachauri noted that a clear  management plan was agreed to at IPCC-22. Austria requested that  the IPCC-24 minutes explicitly reference the need to postpone  COP-13 by three weeks.

### TGICA

TGICA Co-Chair Richard Moss (US) outlined the problems  posed by inadequate data in specific regions or sectors, and by  the need for training and capacity building in developing  countries. He outlined TGICA's proposal to enhance capacity in  developing nations, as contained in the TGICA Progress Report  (IPCC-XXIV/Doc. 5). Delegates approved the proposal on the  understanding that the TGICA will act as a facilitator but will  not provide training.

# NATIONAL GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORIES PROGRAMME

This agenda item was taken up in plenary on Monday and Tuesday.

###     Progress reports on 2006 Guidelines and Emission Factor Database

Taka Hiraishi (Japan), Co-Chair of the National Greenhouse Gas  Inventories Programme (NGGIP) Task Force, presented Progress  Reports on the 2006 Guidelines and the Emission Factor Database,  noting that progress on the 2006 Guidelines is on schedule, and  that the importance of the Emission Factor Database should  increase as progress is made on the 2006 Guidelines (IPCC-XXIV/ Doc. 13).

###     Further work on aerosols

The remaining discussions under this  agenda item concerned further IPCC work on aerosols. NGGIP Task  Force Co-Chair Hiraishi presented the report of the expert meeting  on Emission Estimation of Aerosols Relevant to Climate Change,  held from 2-4 May 2005, in Geneva, Switzerland (IPCC-XXIV/INF. 4),  noting that participants concluded that a number of uncertainties  remain regarding global inventories of aerosol emissions relevant  to climate change, including in the estimation of carbonaceous  measurement methods. He proposed that a follow-up meeting be held  in 2007, and that a substantive agenda be finalized after  completion of the AR4 reports of the working groups, to ensure  synergies in the IPCC (IPCC-XXIV/Doc. 9).

WG I Co-Chair Solomon noted some concerns with the proposal,  including: the need to avoid overlap with the work of WG I; the  need to ensure that the NGGIP works within the IPCC's mandate; and  that insufficient scientific knowledge exists for developing  methodologies on aerosols. New Zealand, with Austria and Hungary,  and opposed by the Russian Federation, said the IPCC should defer  consideration of further work on aerosols until the AR4 is  completed. France, Germany and China questioned whether work on  aerosols is sufficiently advanced to give rise to work on  inventories.

In response to comments from delegates, Co-Chair Hiraishi noted  aerosols would not be included in the 2006 Guidelines, and that  the NGGIP simply wished to consider how its expertise could assist  others with research. Given uncertainties however, he said that  the proposal could be postponed. Delegates agreed to postpone  consideration of further work until after completion of the AR4.

# CONSIDERATION OF FURTHER IPCC WORK ON EMISSION SCENARIOS

This agenda item was addressed in plenary on Tuesday. Chair  Pachauri introduced the outcomes of the Laxenburg workshop on  New Emission Scenarios (IPCC-XXIV/INF. 1), in particular that the  IPCC should play a facilitating and coordinating role in the  development of new emission scenarios. He introduced a proposal to  establish a Task Group on New Emission Scenarios that would work  until IPCC-25 (IPCC-XXIV/Doc. 11), which was approved by delegates  after discussions.

Hungary underlined the importance of emission scenarios beyond  their use by the IPCC, and stressed that the IPCC's responsibility  cannot be reduced to facilitation of the scenario development  process. The Russian Federation underscored the extent to which  the IPCC's work depends upon scenarios. Austria, New Zealand and  many others highlighted the need for new emission scenarios prior  to a fifth assessment report (AR5). Supported by many, the US  proposed explicit reference to the Laxenburg workshop in the Task  Group mandate. Belgium, Greenpeace and many others emphasized the  need for coherent assumptions and storylines, comparable  scenarios, and a wide range of scenarios including economic,  demographic and other social factors. The UK underscored  continuity with past emission scenarios, in order not to undermine  the work upon which the AR4 is based. Egypt and others noted the  need to engage developing countries. Chile proposed that the IPCC  develop methodology guidelines for the development of national  emission scenarios, which would help developing countries. Spain  emphasized the need for temporal and spatial disaggregation of  scenarios, and Chile emphasized the relevance of regional  scenarios for decision makers. Kenya expressed concern about the  ownership of scenarios developed by other institutions, and  associated budgetary implications. Morocco, noting the risk of  scenario proliferation, proposed a work group to clarify a  procedure for preparing scenarios that would serve to  differentiate between IPCC and non-IPCC scenarios. Chair Pachauri  said comments from the discussions would be reflected in the  IPCC-24 report.

###     Final Decision

The approved document (IPCC-XXIV/Doc. 11)  acknowledges the results from the Laxenburg workshop and notes  that there is a need for new emission scenarios, to be available  well before the completion of a possible AR5. The document further  proposes to establish a Task Group, with a lifetime up to IPCC-25,  for the purpose of further defining, inter alia:the facilitation or coordination role to be provided by  the IPCC; deliverables of the emission scenarios development process; the process and timeline for development of new emission  scenarios; and the organizational arrangements of the IPCC's activities on  coordinating, assessing and using scenarios.

# ELECTION PROCEDURES

This agenda item was taken up in plenary each day and in contact  group sessions on Tuesday and Wednesday. In plenary, Chair  Pachauri introduced the Revised Draft Rules and Procedures for the  Election of the IPCC Bureau and Task Force Bureau (IPCC-XXIV/Doc.  6), submitted by the Co-Chairs of the Open-ended Task Group on  Election Procedures, David Warrilow (UK) and Richard Odingo (Kenya).

On Tuesday, Chair Pachauri reminded delegates that the text had  undergone extensive government scrutiny, that the language is  consistent with other IPCC documents, and that the text should not  be considered 'ab initio.' On definitions, discussions centered on  whether IPCC Bureau members are countries or persons, with  Switzerland and the Russian Federation favoring reference to  countries, while Hungary, Canada, Belgium, the Netherlands and  Slovenia supported reference to persons. Austria and the US  suggested attending to this in the rules of procedure rather than  in the definitions. Switzerland, with Canada, New Zealand and  others stressed the need for flexibility in organizing the IPCC  Bureau and, opposed by China, wished to exclude reference to Annex  C, which lists the composition of the IPCC Bureau and any Task  Force Bureau, in the definition of the IPCC Bureau. The Russian  Federation stressed the need for members to have government  support given the intergovernmental nature of the IPCC. The US,  with Hungary, noted the importance of clearly defining the  functions of a nominations committee.

During contact group discussions on Tuesday afternoon and evening,  delegates discussed terms of appointment and re-election  procedures, in particular a rule on cases where a member of the  IPCC Bureau or a Task Force Bureau resigns or is unable to  complete the assigned term of office. Co-Chair Warrilow explained  that the rule includes a 'security check' insofar as the new  member would have to be elected by the Panel. On nominations,  delegates supported deletion of a reference to a candidate's  nationality. On election procedures, many delegates supported the  use of some WMO formulations for a nominations committee to  facilitate voting procedures, and stressed the importance of  regions choosing their candidates. Delegates also agreed to rules  on the size and composition of the IPCC Bureau, the definition of  the IPCC Bureau, and other outstanding issues.

In plenary on Wednesday, Co-Chair Warrilow presented the revised  draft rules agreed to in the contact group (IPCC-XXIV/Doc. 6,  Rev. 1). China expressed reservations on Rule 20, regarding  nomination of candidates, saying that if a country wishes to  nominate a candidate from a different country, the nomination  should be reconfirmed by the country of which the candidate is a  national. The Russian Federation, with Moldova, said that a  country member could not propose someone from another country.  Saudi Arabia stressed the need for specific rules. New Zealand,  Belgium, Canada and others expressed concern that text that had  been agreed in the contact group after many hours of discussion  was being reopened, and called for agreement of the text as a  package. Chair Pachauri proposed temporarily suspending plenary  to allow for informal discussions on this issue.

Upon resumption of the plenary, Co-Chair Warrilow read new  language noting that 'Should a member of the IPCC nominate a  person who is not national of that member's country, the  endorsement of the nominee's government shall be sought.' China  agreed to the new language. The Russian Federation, opposed by New  Zealand, preferred 'to obtain the approval.' Saudi Arabia proposed  additional language that would require regional endorsement.  Contact group discussions continued during the lunch break. In the  afternoon plenary session, Chair Pachauri proposed, and delegates  agreed, to the content of all provisions except Rule 20, to  discuss Rule 20 at IPCC-25, and to adopt the election rules and  procedures only when Rule 20 is agreed.

# OUTREACH

This issue was first addressed in plenary on Tuesday, at which  time IPCC Secretary Christ presented a Progress Report on outreach  activities (IPCC-XXIV/Doc. 7) and a consultancy report entitled  Framework Communications Strategy for Release and Dissemination of  the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report (IPCC-XXIV/INF. 3).

Many delegates highlighted the importance of disseminating IPCC  information to a broad audience. Many others, including the  Netherlands, Uganda and Nigeria, emphasized the need to ensure the  appropriate dissemination of IPCC materials in developing  countries, including paper copies of documents. IPCC Secretary  Christ urged countries that have translated IPCC documents into  non-UN languages to share the translations with the Secretariat.  Canada, Argentina, France and others stressed that the IPCC should  use international meetings as outreach vehicles, and that  individual governments should disseminate information nationally.  The US, Switzerland and Argentina cautioned that outreach  activities should not evolve into marketing mechanisms.

An Outreach Task Group, co-chaired by John Stone (Canada) and  Lucka Kajfez-Bogataj (Slovenia), met on Wednesday, at which time  discussions focused on the establishment and functioning of the  Outreach Task Group; the need for feedback from the consultancy  report; whether it was better to hire staff or to engage external  expertise; the preparation of a communications strategy, the need  for regional and national outreach partners; and preserving the  IPCC's reputation in carrying out communications activities.

Outreach Task Group Co-Chair Stone reported back to the plenary  later that day, underscoring that the outreach process should seek  to engage focal points in countries, recognize past and present  practice on outreach, and the need to complete an outreach  strategy to be presented at IPCC-25. The US suggested using the  TSUs in addition to any focal points. Many countries discussed the  necessity and timing of hiring a Secretariat staff member on  outreach activities. Moldova and others reiterated the importance  of distributing printed materials in developing countries. Noting  a sense of dejà vu from discussions in previous years, and  underscoring that an important part of science is communication,  Chair Pachauri proposed, and the Panel agreed, to hire one person  full time for one year, with the possibility of extending the  contract, and to keep budgetary provisions for two years.

# PROCEDURAL MATTERS

This item was discussed in plenary on Tuesday and Wednesday. IPCC  Secretary Christ introduced a proposal for a Policy and Process  for Admitting Observer Organizations to the IPCC (IPCC-XXIV/Doc.  10). Discussions centered on: additional criteria for the  admittance of organizations, as suggested by the Netherlands, the  need for any admission policy to be consistent with the principles  of the IPCC, as noted by China, and the role of observer  organizations in facilitating transparency and confidence in  organizations, as noted by Hungary, the US and others. The Russian  Federation stated that observer organizations should only be  allowed to attend plenary discussions and not other IPCC meetings.  Chair Pachauri noted that the proposal only calls for observers to  attend plenary discussions. Switzerland said that attendance by  observers is an aspect of outreach.

The US, with support from Switzerland, suggested that this issue  be revisited at IPCC-25, to allow time for members to consider  the policy and to provide the Secretariat with any suggested  amendments. Delegates agreed to this suggestion and that, in  the interim, the Secretariat will provide delegates with a list  of existing observers and those who have asked to become  observers, revise the proposal based on input from governments,  and present it at the next IPCC Bureau meeting before  consideration at IPCC-25.

# CLOSING PLENARY

IPCC Secretary Christ said that IPCC-25 would be held either from  26-28 April 2006, in Mauritius, or, one week later in Nairobi,  Kenya, and that confirmation of the venue would be posted on the  IPCC web site. Chair Pachauri thanked the IPCC Secretariat, all  delegates and participants, and closed the meeting at 4:09 pm.

# A BRIEF ANALYSIS OF WGIII-8 AND IPCC-24

The climate change regime is being constructed around the world,  at full throttle. Be it in the UN context, through adaptation  plans, climate partnerships, awareness campaigns, or carbon  markets, players at all levels, from municipalities, countries,  regions, and international organizations, to civil society  institutions, industry groups, and rock stars, are taking action  on climate change. Such intensive construction requires large  quantities of concrete: a very special type of concrete that the  IPCC is in a unique position to deliver. Since its origin, the  IPCC has been characterized by a special blend of scientific and  intergovernmental features, akin to the sand, gravel and cement  used in concrete. The science, like sand and gravel, gives body  and strength to the concrete. Intergovernmental approval, like  cement, glues everything together, providing resistance and  rendering the final product usable. The specific qualities of the  outcome depend on the particular mix, as well as on the quality of  each component.

Over the years since the IPCC's inception, the degree and  sophistication of scientific understanding and modeling of climate  change and its effects has grown. Likewise, the political, legal  and diplomatic arena has expanded and become more complex. The  addition of more materials to the mix just serves to complicate  the already difficult process of finding the appropriate  composition. But as a reward, when the right composition is found,  the resulting product has more desirable qualities.

# THE PREPARATION PROCESS - IPCC AT WORK

Just as the preparation of concrete involves different steps, the  eighth meeting of Working Group III (WGIII-8) to address the  Special Report on Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS Special Report),  and the 24th session of the IPCC (IPCC-24), are different steps of  the IPCC process. The main task at WGIII-8 was to reach consensus  on a Summary for Policy Makers (SPM) of the CCS Special Report.  Reaching consensus on how to best summarize the Special Report was  lengthy and meticulous. Topics involving considerable discussions  included the relevance of CCS to mitigation, which largely depends  on assumptions on future scenarios, the maturity (or immaturity)  of CCS technology, problems associated with CO2 leakage, the costs  of CCS, and most aspects related to ocean storage of CO2. While  discussions on these issues consumed all of the time scheduled for  the meeting and more, most delegates showed great flexibility to  reach consensus, and the result was a remarkable example of the  IPCC process. Contrary to what some (particularly in the  scientific community) might expect, there was a general view that  government input seemed to result in an improved document that was  more measured, realistic and cautious than the draft text first  presented at WGIII-8 for consideration.

IPCC-24 had a different agenda to that of WGIII-8. Items addressed  included, on the one hand, organizational issues such as rules of  procedure for the election of the IPCC Bureau and Task Force  Bureau and the IPCC programme and budget, and on the other hand,  substantive issues, such as work on emission scenarios, the 2006  IPCC Guidelines, and the possibility of an IPCC special report on  renewable energy and energy efficiency. The closure of the meeting  left a slightly sour taste, because, after agreement seemed at  hand, the adoption of election procedures was again postponed  until the next IPCC session. The text under debate has been under  revision and discussion for years. Agreement was reached on all  the rules but one, and many delegates hoped to be able to approve  the new rules at IPCC-24.

Disagreement on a procedural point should not tarnish the success  of the IPCC's work, which is better described with some numbers:  in the elaboration of the CCS Special Report alone, more than  5,000 comments from more than 100 reviewers in 35 countries were  considered; in preparing the Fourth Assessment Report (AR4), IPCC  Working Group I expects to consider over 20,000 comments, with  participation by over 1,000 experts. And still the IPCC is able to  achieve consensus documents. Putting together the views and  comments of so many experts from around the globe is a formidable  endeavor. The fact that governments, with widely divergent  experiences and interests, can actually agree and partially  co-author the IPCC's outputs can only be described as a  phenomenal achievement - one that stands to provide good quality  concrete for the global climate change architecture.

Nevertheless, an excellent product can be rendered useless if no  one knows about it or uses it. This fact was acknowledged by  delegates when discussing IPCC outreach needs and possibilities.  While it did not appear that great progress was made on this  issue, it did seem that a greater sense of urgency for ensuring  appropriate outreach activities was catching on.

As any good quality control officer knows, continuous testing and  adjustment is needed to ensure quality. Either an excess or  shortage of elements can damage the product. The low participation  of developing country experts in IPCC processes continues to be a  problem, as noted by many observers both formally and informally  during the meeting. All agree on the need to address this issue.

# NEW CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS - THE FUTURE OF THE IPCC

In the same way that the 'paperless office' did not eliminate  paper, it is unlikely that new construction materials will make  concrete obsolete. However, they might cause it to be used in a  different way.

As the oldest international body dealing specifically with climate  change, the IPCC was created at a time when climate change science  and awareness were scarce. Today, 17 years later, the scientific  and policy landscape is different. As one delegate expressed in  plenary, the IPCC runs the risk of being overwhelmed by the  quantity of future emission scenarios and general scientific  knowledge on climate change. Some of its past 'blockbuster'  products, such as the Assessment Reports or the Special Report on  Emission Scenarios - generally seen as benchmarks for climate  change science - might not be replicable some years from now, when  the impact of IPCC reports may be diminished given the large  volume of climate change science and modeling available. Some  commentators have envisaged future roles for the IPCC other than  'providing periodic assessments of the current scientific  understanding of climate change.' Some opinions on the roles that  the IPCC should play in the future, such as a science 'manager,'  or 'compiler,' can be inferred already from interventions during  IPCC-24. However, this remains mere speculation. AR4 is currently  drawing most of the energy of the IPCC Working Groups, and  discussion on the future of the IPCC is in neutral until AR4 nears  its end. The spark that lights this discussion might very well be  the nature of the IPCC´s involvement in future emission scenarios.  Then, expect the issue of the IPCC's role in the future to take  over the agenda.

# UPCOMING MEETINGS

### WORKSHOP ON INTERNATIONAL POLICY APPROACHES TO ADDRESS THE CLIMATE  CHANGE CHALLENGE

Organized by the International Petroleum  Industry Environmental Conservation Organization (IPIECA) and  China's Office of Global Environmental Affairs, this workshop will  take place from 25-26 October 2005, in Beijing, China. Participants  will consider key elements of climate change risk management and  future policy architectures to address climate change. For more  information, contact: IPEICA; tel: +44-020-7633-2388; fax: +44-020- 7633-2389; e-mail: paula.lynch@ipieca.org; internet:  http://www.ipieca.org/downloads/climate_change/beijing2005/beijing _email/ccwg_beijing.html

### CREATING THE CLIMATE FOR CHANGE - THE SECOND SUSTAINABLE ENERGY  FINANCE ROUNDTABLE

This roundtable will take place on 27 October  2005, in New York, US. Participants will explore successful  approaches to renewable energy and energy efficiency financing and  investment. This event will follow the UNEP Finance Initiative  Global Roundtable. For more information, contact: Eric Usher, UNEP  Energy Branch; tel: +33 (0)1-44-37-76-14; e-mail:   eric.usher(at)unep.fr; or Paul Clements-Hunt, UNEP Finance  Initiative; tel: +41 (0)22-917-8116; e-mail; pch@unep.ch;  internet: http://www.sefi-roundtable.org/

### BEIJING INTERNATIONAL RENEWABLE ENERGY CONFERENCE 2005

Following  up on the Renewables 2004 event held in Germany, China is holding  this Conference on 7-8 November 2005, in Beijing. For more  information, contact: Qin Haiyan; tel: +86-10-6422-8218; e-mail:  birec2005@birec2005.cn; internet: http://www.birec2005.cn

### FIRST MEETING OF PARTIES TO THE KYOTO PROTOCOL AND ELEVENTH  CONFERENCE OF PARTIES TO THE UNFCCC

The first Meeting of Parties  to the Kyoto Protocol (MOP-1) is taking place in conjunction with  COP-11 of the UNFCCC from 28 November to 9 December 2005, in  Montreal, Canada. For more information, contact: UNFCCC  Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail:  secretariat@unfccc.int; internet:  http://unfccc.int/meetings/cop_11/items/3394.php

### SEVENTEENTH MEETING OF THE PARTIES TO THE MONTREAL PROTOCOL

This  meeting will be held from 12-16 December 2005, in Dakar, Senegal.  For more information, contact: Ozone Secretariat; tel: +254-20-62- 38-51; fax: +254-20- 62-46-91/92/93; e-mail: ozoneinfo@unep.org;  internet: http://www.unep.org/ozone

### 25TH MEETING OF THE IPCC

IPCC-25 will be held either from 26-28  April 2006, in Mauritius, or, one week later in Nairobi, Kenya.  Confirmation of the venue will be posted on the IPCC web site. For  more information, contact Renate Christ, IPCC Secretary; tel: +41- 22-730-8208; fax: +41-22-730-8025; e-mail: IPCC-Sec@wmo.int;  internet: http://www.ipcc.ch.