---
title: "MEETINGS OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES OF THE UN FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE, 2 - 12 June 1998"
id: enb1277e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1277e
date: 1998-06-12
abstract: "The subsidiary bodies of the United Nations Framework Convention  on Climate Change (FCCC) will meet from 2-12 June 1998 in Bonn,  Germany. This is the first meeting since the adoption of the  Kyoto Protocol at the Third Conference of the Parties (COP-3) in  December 1997. Both the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and  Technical Assistance (SBSTA) and the Subsidiary Body for  Implementation (SBI) will address aspects of national  communications and mechanisms for cooperative implementation,  such as the clean development mechanism, emissions trading and  'joint implementation' (this term is used in the agenda for  convenience)."
---

SBSTA will also discuss, inter alia, cooperation with  international organizations and methodological issues, such as  emissions inventories and land use and forestry. SBI will  address the financial mechanism, the second review of the  adequacy of commitments and arrangements for COP-4. The Ad Hoc  Group on Article 13 (AG13) will continue discussions on  functions and procedures for a multilateral consultative  process.

# POST-KYOTO ACTIVITIES

### PROTOCOL SIGNATURES

On 16 March, the Kyoto Protocol officially  opened for signature at UN headquarters and was signed by  Argentina, Switzerland, the Maldives, Samoa, and Antigua and  Barbuda. At the signing ceremony, FCCC Executive Secretary  Michael Zammit Cutajar said he looked forward to the Protocol's  entry into force very early in the next century and to a first  review of its contents soon after. The first benchmark will be  in 2005, when Parties must demonstrate progress in meeting the  agreed emissions targets and start work on defining targets for  the period after 2012.

On the occasion of the sixth session of the Commission on  Sustainable Development (CSD-6), Japan signed the Protocol on 29  April, followed on 30 April by the 15 members of the EU,  Australia, Brazil, Canada, Norway and Monaco. New Zealand signed  on 25 May. On 29 May, China became the thirty-seventh country to  sign. Fifty-five countries representing 55 percent of 1990  global carbon dioxide emissions must ratify the Protocol before  it enters into force. No country has yet ratified the treaty.

### FORMAL AND INFORMAL MEETINGS

The period following COP-3  witnessed a flurry of meetings, statements and events as  countries embarked on the task of developing initial plans for  implementation, addressing domestic reactions and developing  processes to further define the terms of the Kyoto Protocol.

Implementation of the Protocol was addressed at a number of  high-level meetings. On 17 May, the final communiqué of the G8  meeting in Birmingham, UK, welcomed the recent signature of the  Protocol by some G8 countries and confirmed the intention of the  rest to sign it within the next year. The leaders agreed to,  inter alia: undertake domestic action to reduce emissions;  develop flexible mechanisms; and draw up rules to ensure a  verifiable trading system and an effective compliance regime.  OECD Environment Ministers agreed on 3 April that OECD members  would give a high priority to ratifying and implementing the  Protocol. On 1 April, G8 Energy Ministers met in Moscow and  signed a communiqué on cooperation in the energy sector that  included a call to give special attention to the Kyoto Protocol.  In a joint statement issued at the Summit of the Americas in  Santiago, the presidents of the US and Chile, inter alia:  stressed that the Protocol's market mechanisms would mobilize  private sector resources; recognized the potential of the Clean  Development Mechanism; and noted that developing countries  should participate meaningfully in efforts to address climate  change by, for example, taking on emissions targets.

On 30 May, the US, France, Britain and others began discussions  in Paris on holding one or more international conferences to  persuade India and Pakistan to renounce further nuclear testing  in return for help from the industrial world in developing  civilian nuclear power centers. French President Chirac also  noted the threat of a 'pollution bomb' if these and other Asian  countries do not switch to clean energy sources, 'a principal  issue of the Kyoto conference on global warming last December.'  He said imposing sanctions on India and Pakistan would make it  more difficult for them to switch.

Regional conferences in Asia, Eastern Europe, Africa and Latin  America were organized to serve as fora for presentation of the  methodological framework, results and experience of national  studies, and their relevance and replicability in the region. A  conference on Climate Change Mitigation in Africa was held in  Victoria Falls, Zimbabwe from 18-20 May 1998. Twenty-four  African countries were represented at the conference as well as  representatives from the UNEP Centre Denmark, Danida, GTZ, UNDP  and UNEP. The Conference was held as part of the final stage of  the UNEP/GEF project 'Economics of Climate Change Limitation,'  ran in parallel with the conference for Latin America held in  Quito, Ecuador from 21 - 22 May.

At other meetings, the Protocol's flexibility mechanisms,  particularly emissions trading, drew considerable attention. At  the first GEF Assembly on 2 April, the World Bank's managing  director of operations said the Bank plans to set up a pilot  project to help countries trade their carbon dioxide emissions  allowances. The project, called the Carbon Investment Fund,  would help buyers and sellers trade their allowed emissions. He  said the bank might be able to withdraw from the project  eventually and let the private sector take it over and widen its  scale.

A meeting on emissions trading, sponsored by the Columbia Earth  Institute, UNDP, UNESCO, UNIDO and UNEP Organizing Committee,  was held from 24-26 April in New York. Participants discussed  several topics including the quantity and price of emissions  permits, the necessity of private-sector participation, and the  failure of past efforts to produce incentives for technology  transfer. Panel discussions elaborated on issues such as  opposition to the Kyoto Protocol by both the private sector and  developing countries due to fear of negative economic impacts  and achieving mitigation through interaction between developing  countries and the private sector.

UNCTAD held an expert group meeting on emissions trading in  London on 12 May. Some participants noted that attitudes toward  the concept of trading were apparently shifting and said trading  provides both efficiency and flexibility in meeting established  targets and timetables, as well as incentives for the  development of new technologies. Others, however, expressed  concern about lack of interest in buying and selling something  as diffuse and unclear as the right to emit carbon dioxide.  Environmental NGOs were concerned that trading will allow  wealthy countries to buy permits to emit carbon dioxide that has  not been emitted by Russia due to its economic crisis.

Some countries and businesses have taken initial actions under  the flexibility mechanisms. On 5 March, Suncor Energy Inc.  (Canada) and Niagara Mohawk Power Corporation (US), announced a  greenhouse gas emissions trade that the two companies hoped  would be a first step towards the creation of a global market  and an international trading system. On 11 March, a climate  project in Bolivia was finalized, which participants hoped would  become an example of how forest protection projects can be used  to offset emissions. As part of the project, the Bolivian  government has added 2.1 million acres of tropical forests to  the Noel Kempff Mercado National Park, essentially doubling its  size. By investing in the protection of this area, three U.S.  corporations, American Electric Power, BP America and  PacifiCorp, and the Bolivian government will receive carbon  offset credits.

Russian President Boris Yeltsin and Prime Minister Ryutaro  Hashimoto, in their summit on 19 April in Kawana, agreed to  begin feasibility studies on twenty promising joint  implementation projects to improve energy efficiency at Russian  plants and reduce greenhouse gas emissions and gain offsets  against their own emissions. The two leaders also agreed to  expand cooperation in energy to the field of nuclear technology.

### OTHER EVENTS

Several other events and meetings may likely  influence the negotiations in Bonn. Newspaper accounts reported  that European ministers, when signing the Protocol, expressed  strong concern that the US, Japan and Russia were violating the  spirit of the agreement by pursuing trading rather than domestic  reductions. The UK noted that domestic actions must be the main  means of achieving reductions and said the EU would propose to  limit the amount of emissions reductions that can be achieved  through flexible mechanisms. He said developed countries need to  consider ways for engaging developing countries in the process  and supported a review of the commitments of all Parties rather  than a pursuit of voluntary reduction targets. Following high- level consultations on 22 May, Japan and the EU publicly agreed  to pool efforts to convince the US to sign the Protocol and  encourage developing countries to reduce emissions.

In the US, the Clinton administration proposed domestic action  on the Protocol, but not without generating considerable  political resistance. On 29 January, US President Clinton  announced a five-year, $6.3 billion package of tax incentives  and research to spur development of fuel-efficient automobiles  and other energy-saving technologies. However, some members of  the Congress have sought to block the administration from  spending money on programs to reduce carbon emissions unless the  Senate ratifies the Protocol. They characterized the  administration's proposal as a 'back door' way of implementing  the Protocol without a Senate vote. On 22 May, US lawmakers  sought to exempt US military operations from the Protocol by  proposing an amendment to next year's military authorization  bill that 'prohibits the restriction of armed forces under the  Kyoto Protocol.' Japan proposed domestic legislation that provides a basic  framework for emission reductions by requiring both the central  and prefectural governments to draw up plans to reduce emissions  and make frequent progress reports. It does not require  industries to disclose emission levels or to draw up reduction  plans. The preliminary draft of the bill, which would have  imposed stricter measures on industry, including mandatory  reporting of emission reduction plans, was revised after it met  resistance from the Ministry of International Trade and  Industry. Environment agency officials said the significance of  the legislation lies in its suggestion that companies should  adopt 'self-regulatory measures.' Critics, however, said the  proposal lacks measures necessary to ensure compliance by  industry.

NGOs participating in the process also underwent changes. A new  industry NGO, the Pew Center on Climate Change, was launched and  includes corporate members from aerospace, auto and appliance  manufacturers as well as several energy companies. Shell Oil  announced its withdrawl from the Global Climate Coalition  following irreconcilable differences over the Protocol. The US  Chamber of Commerce launched an Internet campaign to disseminate  information from foreign policy experts to the public in order  to build opposition to the Kyoto Protocol, which it  characterized as a threat to US security and sovereignty.

Scientists from the US and the UK announced that 1997 was the  warmest year on record and that nine of the last eleven years  were among the warmest periods ever recorded. Satellite images  also confirmed that a section of an Antarctic ice shelf had  broken away from the Larsen Ice Shelf. However, newspaper  accounts reported that an informal group of industrialists had  drafted a proposal to convince the public that the FCCC is based  on unsound science. They would seek to recruit scientists who  share their views on the science of climate change to help  convince the public that the risk of global warming is too  uncertain to justify emission controls.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR

### SBI

SBI will meet at 10:00 am in the Maritim Room.

### SBSTA

SBSTA will meet at 11:00 am in the Beethoven Room.

### PLENARY

Plenary will meet at 2:30 pm in the Maritim Room.