---
title: "REPORT OF THE SECOND MEETING OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES OF THE UN FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE: 27 FEBRUARY - 4 MARCH 1996"
id: 1226000e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/1226000e
date: 1996-03-04
abstract: "The UN Convention on Climate Change's Subsidiary Body on  Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) and  Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) held their  second meetings in Geneva from 27 February through 4  March 1996. The SBSTA considered scientific assessment  and cooperation, including the Intergovernmental Panel on  Climate Change's (IPCC) Second Assessment Report (SAR),  reporting by Annex I and non-Annex I Parties, activities  implemented jointly (AIJ) and the Technical Advisory  Panels (TAPs). The SBI considered in-depth reviews of  national communications, matters related to the financial  mechanism, financial and technical cooperation, transfer  of technology, arrangements for the relocation of the  Secretariat to Bonn and the Second Conference of the  Parties."
---

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE SBSTA AND SBI

The first meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the  Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP-1) requested  the Secretariat, in document FCCC/CP/1995/7/Add.1, to  make arrangements for sessions of the Subsidiary Body for  Scientific and Technical Advice (SBSTA) and the  Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI). COP-1  characterized the role of the SBSTA as the link between  scientific, technical and technological assessments, the  information provided by competent international bodies,  and the policy oriented needs of the COP. The SBSTA is  expected to develop recommendations on the following  issues: scientific assessments, national communications  from Annex I Parties, methodologies, first communications  from non-Annex I Parties, activities implemented jointly  under the pilot phase, transfer of technology, allocation  and control of international bunker fuels, possible  contributions to the 'Berlin Mandate' process,  cooperation with competent international bodies,  including the IPCC, proposals on longer term activities  and a workshop on NGO inputs.

COP-1 characterized the role of the SBI as developing  recommendations to assist the COP in the review and  assessment of the implementation of the Convention and in  the preparation and implementation of its decisions. The  SBI is expected to develop recommendations on the  following issues: national communications from Annex I  Parties, first communications from non-Annex I Parties,  matters relating to the financial mechanism, transfer of  technology, activities implemented jointly under the  pilot phase, institutional and budgetary matters,  methodological issues, technical cooperation activities  of the Secretariat and its partners, proposals on long  term activities and organizational arrangements,  proposals for future cooperation between the SBI, the  SBSTA and the IPCC, and possible contributions to the  'Berlin Mandate' process.

## FIRST SESSION

### SBSTA

The first meeting of the SBSTA was held in Geneva  from 28-30 August 1995. Delegates confronted a daunting  array of technically and politically complex issues,  including: scientific assessments, national  communications from Annex I Parties, methodologies, first  communications from non-Annex I Parties, activities  implemented jointly under the pilot phase, transfer of  technology, allocation and control of international  bunker fuels, possible contributions to the 'Berlin  Mandate' process, cooperation with competent  international bodies, including the IPCC, proposals on  longer term activities, and a workshop on NGO inputs. The  SBSTA was also supposed to establish intergovernmental  technical advisory panels on technologies (TAP-T) and  methodologies (TAP-M). However, the SBSTA did not have  time to consider all of these issues. Among the more  contentious issues were: definition of the SBSTA's  relationship with the IPCC, the terms of reference and  composition of the TAPs and the elaboration of guidelines  for national communications from non-Annex I Parties. By  the end of the meeting, delegates successfully identified  areas for cooperation with the IPCC, agreed on a division  of labor with the SBI on technology transfer issues, and  requested the Secretariat to organize a workshop on non- governmental inputs, among other things. However, no  progress was made on the formation of the TAPs and  delegates had to resume this discussion at the second  session.

### SBI

The first meeting of the SBI took place from 31  August - 1 September 1995 in Geneva. The SBI addressed:  communications from Annex I Parties; a progress report on  in-depth review; institutional and budgetary matters;  matters relating to the financial mechanism; and the  elaboration and scheduling of the programme of work for  1996-1997. Delegates rapidly  adopted the SBI's work  programme and recommended that the COP adopt the draft  Memorandum of Understanding with the GEF as the financial  mechanism, and proposed a draft decision on this item to  be adopted by the COP at its second session.

# SUBSIDIARY BODY ON SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE

SBSTA Chair Tibor Farago (Hungary) opened the second  session of the Subsidiary Body on Scientific and  Technological Advice (SBSTA) by noting the tight schedule  and the need for SBSTA's work to feed into the second  Conference of Parties (COP-2) as well as into the work of  other subsidiary bodies, especially the Ad Hoc Group on  the Berlin Mandate (AGBM).

In his opening statement, UNFCCC Executive Secretary  Michael Zammit Cutajar said seven countries had become  Parties to the Convention since 3 November 1995: Bhutan,  Djibouti, Ghana, Guinea Bissau, Honduras, Mozambique, and  Nicaragua. Nine others have ratified or acceded and will  become Parties soon: Belgium, Cambodia, El Salvador,  Guatemala, Morocco, Slovenia, Syria, the United Arab  Emirates and Yemen. The Parties now number 145 and will  increase to 154 when the nine states complete their  notice period. He noted that financial constraints from  the UN budget crisis have also affected document  preparation and translation, because a ban on overtime  limits flexibility to do last minute translations. He  observed the tendency during the work of subsidiary  bodies to ask for documents for the next session without  evaluating their utility to delegations or the process.  He urged delegates to carefully consider the necessity of  such requests.

Delegates then adopted the provisional agenda  (FCCC/SBSTA/ 1996/1) and annotations  (FCCC/SBSTA/1996/1/Add.1). The Secretariat said that four  new NGO observers would be accredited to attend meetings,  pending formal action by COP.

The Chair said that the TAPs and AIJ were difficult and  complex issues. The Chair's tentative, informal  conclusions on the TAPs were circulated following  consultations at AGBM 2. Difficulties concerned the terms  of reference and the balance and background of experts.  To address concerns that the TAPs could duplicate the  work of SBSTA, the emphasis should be to develop a  concrete task list based on Parties' proposals. Delegates  should make more specific, precise suggestions of what is  expected from experts. Regardless of the size of a panel,  experts could not cover all disciplines, so a roster of  experts nominated by governments has been suggested. To  address balance in the nomination of experts, two  approaches have been considered: nominations by regional  groups, or divided evenly between Annex I and non-Annex I  Parties. The Chair's draft conclusions combined the two  methods. They would give the SBSTA Chair authority to  select from Parties' nominated experts. The Chair  suggested initiating further informal consultations,  which he would lead.

On AIJ, the Chair said the SBSTA needs to establish a  framework for reporting, presenting progress and  conclusions to COP-2. Several proposals have been  received and document FCCC/SBSTA/1996/MISC.1 describes an  initial phase of reporting based on proposals from the US  and Germany. Questions include whether recommended  elements could be used for an initial reporting period,  what entity could assess the reports, and when to begin  analysis of the reporting. He recommended beginning  informal consultations under Diego Malpede (Argentina),  toward consideration of a document later in the week.

## TECHNICAL ADVISORY PANELS

Delegates had before them document FCCC/SBSTA/1996/2, a  report by the Chair on his informal consultations on the  establishment of intergovernmental technical advisory  panels (TAPs). The report notes that the Chair conducted  consultations during AGBM 2 and produced an informal  paper that suggested a single panel on a provisional  basis combining the functions of the previously proposed  two panels. The paper proposed that SBSTA consider a  possible work programme, contained in an annex to the  document. It also proposed that the Secretariat invite  nominations for the panel and for a roster of experts to  assist with specialized tasks. The work programme lists  11 tasks, including technology inventory, assessment of  specific innovative technologies, technological aspects  of policy guidance to the GEF, IPCC inventory  methodologies, technical aspects of national  communications and AIJ, adaptation processes, methods for  projecting and estimating the effects of measures and  information on terms for transfer of technology. The  Chair's report also notes that the SBSTA must consider a  proposal by its Bureau regarding nominees, review the  adequacy the budget for panel meetings, organization of  the panel, and the type of recommendations the panel  would make to the SBSTA Informal consultations were convened in the morning of  Wednesday, 28 February to allow delegates to express  preliminary views. Those who spoke gave high priority to  the work programme of the TAPs and emphasized assessment  of specific innovative technologies and methods for  projecting and estimating effects of measures. Delegates  also expressed flexibility on the number of members, but  disagreed on the balance of membership. Developed  countries proposed dividing members between Annex I and  non-Annex I Parties, while others noted the UN practice  and preferred allocating members according to geographic  regions. The Chair's paper proposed a 20-expert panel  composed of two from each of the five UN regional groups,  five from Annex I Parties and five from non-Annex I  Parties. The Chair noted that his compromise would not  satisfy those who were inflexible on this point, but  could provide a solution to the disagreement.

On Thursday, 29 February, the Chair invited additional  interventions from delegations and groups on the TAPs.  ITALY, on behalf of the EU, said assessment of  technologies and methods for estimating the effects of  measures have not been properly addressed. He proposed  establishing a provisional panel, supported by a roster  of experts, that would report by COP-3. The panel should  have an equal number of Annex I and non-Annex I experts,  but with a reduced work plan could have less than 20  people. COSTA RICA said the G-77/China was working to  produce a joint position. The US said the TAPs must draw  from private and public sector, industry, academia and  NGOs. Members should be independent experts, not  representing governments or regional groups. The TAPs'  work should be peer reviewed and presented to the SBSTA  or the AGBM. Participants should reflect geographic and  technical balance.

IRAN, on behalf of the Asian Group, said the Chair's  proposal on the number of TAPs is acceptable, but no  consensus on distribution of panel members exists. The  intergovernmental nature of the panels should restrict  participants to intergovernmental or governmental  organizations, not NGOs. NIGERIA said the African Group  supported the Chair's paper.

Delegates resumed informal consultations during the  evening of Friday, 1 March. The Chair noted there was no  consensus on the composition of the TAPs and asked if any  delegation could offer any innovative approaches. The G-77/China favored the conventional UN regional approach,  but JUSCANZ and the EU, because of the specifics of  Convention, wanted an Annex I/non-Annex I balance. The  Chair recalled his attempt to produce a middle ground  proposal and suggested that if there was no chance for  agreement, the Group should take this item off the agenda  and devote its time to other issues.

The Chair attempted to give the floor to an environmental  NGO representative, but SAUDI ARABIA objected that this  issue was between Parties. The US supported allowing the  NGO representative to speak. The PHILIPPINES, coordinator  of G-77/China on this issue, recalled that her group had  entered these negotiations with a solid position, but had  moved from it to accommodate the process. She said the G-77/China had made all possible concessions and reiterated  the extreme importance of this issue. She also said if  there is no agreement, the G-77/China supports setting up  the roster of experts.

The EU stated that the discussion had focused on the work  plan, the provisional nature of the TAPs and the  composition, and asked that these issues be considered on  an equal footing. He said the work programme should be  restricted to assessing technologies and projecting  effects of measures because the other proposed elements  are being addressed elsewhere. These tasks should be  completed by COP-3. The TAPs should be established on a  provisional basis and reviewed by COP-3. On composition,  it should be evenly balanced and able to do the work.  SLOVENIA supported the Philippines on the TAPs and agreed  with the US on the NGO intervention.

CLIMATE ACTION NETWORK said the number and composition  are for governments to decide, but noted that the actual  number is less important than agreeing that the TAPs can  set up sub-panels of independent experts. She said  members should serve in their individual capacities. Both  Annex I and non-Annex I countries must work to ensure  there is a balance of expertise. The TAPs should perform  short-term assessments to help identify technology needs  at a local level. She agreed that technology assessment  and projecting effects of measures are appropriate tasks  for the work programme. The TAPs should be reviewed and  possibly renewed at COP-4, and the work should not be  filtered by the SBSTA. She also said TAPs should be set  up under the IPCC, but should not limit it.

The Chair then suggested inviting experts, based on the  proposed roster, to produce technical advisory papers. He  said that this was not a good alternative, but the group  has agreed on the need for expertise. The SBSTA must  either establish this panel or find an alternative. The  PHILIPPINES said the G-77/China's understanding of  balance seems to be at odds with the other groups. She  asked if 50/50 represents a real balance when non-Annex I  Parties make up 76% of the countries involved. On  expertise, she asked if there was suggestion that  developing countries cannot produce reliable experts. The  regional approach is the only way to ensure geographic  balance and guarantee that regions such as Africa and  Asia can bring in experts. Setting up a roster will be  useful, but then the question arises on how to select it.  She said the G-77/China was willing to apply everything  the EU suggested on the initial work programme, but  adaptation technologies should also be addressed.

INDIA said that the SBSTA should take regional groups as  the basis, and noted that Asia has both Annex I and non- Annex I countries. He said the presumption that some  experts are inferior to others is unacceptable and asked  what reasons exist for objecting if the question is  balance.

AUSTRALIA stressed the need to deliver the work plan for  the technical experts. He asked if the SBSTA could move  forward and establish a roster of experts, set up  workshops and produce outputs according to specific  timelines. The EU supported an agreed work programme to  be carried out through workshops by experts from a roster  selected by the Secretariat or the SBSTA Bureau. These  arrangements would be reviewed by COP-3.

GERMANY reminded delegates this was the first phase of  experimentation that could lead to a more permanent  institutional structure. She said there was no intention  whatsoever to say that Annex I experts are superior to  others. The EU asked for an equal number because this  Convention's structure is distinct from other conventions  and linked to commitments. Annex I countries have to take  lead in action, which is why the EU wants this balance.

Saudi Arabia said SBSTA cannot burden the Secretariat or  the Bureau with selection of experts. The TAPs should  reflect an equitable distribution of experts nominated by  each region.

The Chair suggested the report would give no conclusion  but delegates continued the debate, suspending  negotiations twice for consultations in regional groups.  They were unable to reach agreement when discussions  resumed. The Chair's draft conclusions, adopted by the  Plenary, note that delegates could not reach an  agreement.

## SCIENTIFIC ASSESSMENTS

### CONSIDERATION OF THE IPCC SECOND ASSESSMENT REPORT

Delegates considered document FCCC/SBSTA/1996/7,  consideration of the second assessment report (SAR) of  the IPCC, and three addenda containing the IPCC working  group (WG) reports: WGI on the science of climate change;  WGII on the scientific-technical analyses of impacts,  adaptations, and mitigation; and WGIII on the economic  and social dimensions. They also discussed document  FCCC/SBSTA/1996/6, Cooperation with the IPCC. IPCC Chair  Bert Bolin gave a broad overview of the SAR and  highlighted several key findings of the three working  groups. WGI found, inter alia, that atmospheric  greenhouse gas concentrations continue to increase, which  leads to an increasingly positive radiative forcing of  climate, and the balance of evidence suggests a  discernible human influence on global climate change. WGI  also found that considerable advancements have been made  in distinguishing human-induced climate change from that  occurring naturally.

WGII provided several conclusions: models project that a  substantial fraction of the existing forested areas will  undergo major changes in broad vegetation types; deserts  are likely to become more extreme; productivity of  agriculture and forestry will increase in some areas and  decrease in others; and developing countries will be more  seriously affected and may have fewer adaptation options.  WGIII found that a prudent way to deal with climate  change is through a portfolio of actions, which will  differ according to country. Significant 'no regrets'  opportunities are available in most countries and the  risk of damage provides rationale for action beyond 'no  regrets.' WGIII also notes that flexible, cost-effective  policies can reduce mitigation costs and increase cost- effectiveness of emission reduction measures.

Some delegates gave general comments on the SAR, while  others asked specific questions.

The EU requested that the SBSTA commend the IPCC  summaries and synthesis report and bring forward the  recommendations on research and observation to COP-2 as a  point of action. He called on the Secretariat to prepare  a document on priority actions to be discussed by SBSTA-3  and noted that the scale of the problem requires urgent  action based on the precautionary principle. SWITZERLAND  noted the IPCC report provides a clear signal, but added  that mitigation measures are available and many will cost  little. MALAYSIA asked whether the climate models will  have a global or regional basis. IPCC Chair Bolin replied  that any regional modeling developments would be a major  undertaking. BRAZIL said the SBSTA can make  recommendations to the COP to endorse areas the IPCC  identified to promote governmental and international  action to fill knowledge gaps. It is appropriate for the  IPCC to avoid policy recommendations, but the SBSTA  should use the SAR to guide decisions on Parties' actions  to determine future emissions without fear of suggesting  policies. As Co-Chair of IPCC Working Group I, he  responded to Malaysia's question about regional models:  predictions of climate change at smaller scales are not  yet accurate.

The US noted the range of cost-effective technologies and  policies and said that national and intergenerational  issues justify going beyond the 'no regrets' strategies.  He suggested greater involvement of business, industry,  NGO and environmental experts to ease the burden on  scientists. The uncertainties demonstrate that action by  Annex I countries alone is inadequate. AUSTRALIA noted  the number of 'no regrets' policies, but said the risk of  damage provides rationale for actions beyond 'no  regrets.' He said the difference in resources and  potential damage makes equity considerations key to  climate change policies.

The INTERNATIONAL OCEANOGRAPHIC COMMISSION (IOC) OF  UNESCO reported on recent IOC activities related to the  UNFCCC and highlighted proposed actions, including  strengthening the cooperative links between IOC, IPCC and  SBSTA, preparation of a sea-level database for  distribution among AOSIS States at COP-2, initiation of a  coral reefs study from the carbon accumulation viewpoint  and provision to the IPCC of the list of IOC experts.

The WORLD METEOROLOGICAL ORGANIZATION (WMO) expressed  interest in assisting implementation as far as possible  and said it will increase support to the IPCC, as  appropriate and feasible. IRAN said the SAR provided an  opportunity to consider socioeconomic impacts, technology  transfer and policy measures for sustainable economic  growth. It is important to recognize that significant  emissions reductions require actions to accelerate  technology transfer.

ZIMBABWE highlighted the result that developing countries  are the most heavily affected and have less adaptation  options regarding food, water and human health. Supported  by KENYA and POLAND, she said there is a need to get  information to all levels of society and to improve  regional participation using local experts. She proposed  a process to disseminate the SAR in a form that could be  used at all levels and that the SBSTA could set up a  group to evaluate the policy implications of the SAR.  NIGERIA said the SAR is a preliminary document that the  IPCC will continue to develop. Distinct contributions to  climate change from human activities and natural causes  need to be determined. JAPAN highlighted: substantial  evidence that warming is occurring; the requirement for  future emissions lower than 1990 levels, if  concentrations are to stabilize; the suggestion that a  significant amount of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions can  be reduced at small or negligible cost; that diffusion of  technology is vital; and that while scientific  uncertainty still exists, the possibly huge impact  requires action according to the precautionary principle.  He suggested a paper on mitigation technologies.

CHINA asked whether the SAR's impact assessments were  based on the latest projections of mean global surface  temperature increase or earlier, higher projections. He  said reducing uncertainties, especially in regional  patterns and timing should be priorities in the IPCC's  work. The IPCC should develop a simple version of its  report for ordinary people in developing countries.

IPCC Chair Bolin said that technical papers could help  convert the SAR's findings into terms that are policy  relevant. Wide dissemination is important, but eventually  each country needs a unit to absorb and distribute the  information at various levels of knowledge and  competence. Regarding uncertainty, the climate system is  not a machine we completely understand. Delegates must  decide whether uncertainty is so great that we do  nothing, or that there is a need to do something.  Speaking as Co-Chair of IPCC Working Group II, the US  replied to China's question about impacts under lower  projected temperature rise, noting that the SAR looked at  the sensitivity of systems to climate change, thus  allowing for lower predictions.

TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO, on behalf of AOSIS, hoped the  conclusion that future climate change will be dominated  by human influence until GHG concentrations stabilize  will provide impetus to action. Conclusions on  vulnerability and adaptation should inform international  decisions in this area. He said Parties need to weigh  immediate action against delay, and expressed alarm that  impacts of climate change will contribute to further  climate change. AOSIS countries are especially concerned  with the role of reefs as carbon sinks. The MARSHALL  ISLANDS said the possible 95 cm sea-level rise would  destroy the physical and economic viability of his  country. He said such examples of the socioeconomic  impact of not dealing with climate change should be given  more influence than a few less petrodollars for some  countries. Adaptation should get a higher profile,  including coral reef adaptation and scientific and  technical cooperation. CANADA urged the SBSTA to endorse  the SAR and bring it to the COP for action. He placed  priority on public dissemination and said impacts on  unmanaged water, permafrost regions and boreal forests  would impact Canada. Mitigation and adaptation would  provide opportunities to private and public sectors.

KUWAIT said agreement on the need to reduce uncertainty  means that uncertainty exists. The PHILIPPINES  appreciated the report's acknowledgment that developing  countries are going to suffer from the adverse effects of  climate change. She noted a workshop in the UK on  regional climate variation and human activities. KENYA  said the report does not say which concentrations could  be dangerous and asked if this represented a scientific  fact or a policy position. IPCC Chair Bolin replied that  'dangerous' is difficult to define and requires a value  judgment that the IPCC will not make.

On Friday morning, 1 March, delegates began considering  draft conclusions on the consideration of the IPCC SAR  (FCCC/SBSTA/1996/L.1/Add.1). The Secretariat noted that  paragraph 2 contains highlights of the IPCC conclusions,  but that wording should be improved to be fully  compatible with the IPCC report language. COSTA RICA, on  behalf of the G-77/China, said the SBSTA should receive  the information, acknowledge receipt and pass on the  report to the COP. The SBSTA should not select topics  from the IPCC SAR to highlight in its document. The US,  supported by POLAND, said it would be better to use exact  IPCC wording because the SAR is a negotiated text. The  choice of key conclusions is good but omits mention of  very long time scales. He suggested adding to the IPCC  work programme early development of new emission  scenarios and consideration of implications of emission  limitation proposals under discussion.

SAUDI ARABIA said a technical report on economic impacts  on non-Annex I Parties from new commitments of Annex I  Parties needs to be included, as well as an evaluation of  climate change avoided by proposed new commitments.  Supported by CHINA, KUWAIT and NIGERIA, he added that the  SBSTA should only thank the IPCC for its assessment and  transmit the synthesis report and the SAR to the COP. The  SBSTA should not be selective or pick and choose  conclusions, which could overlook equally important parts  of the SAR. Paragraph 2, containing a list of highlights  from the IPCC SAR, should be removed.

The MARSHALL ISLANDS said if the SBSTA transmits the IPCC  reports without comments, it would insult the IPCC's  integrity. He recommended retaining the list of major  conclusions. The Chair said the SBSTA was not a 'pure and  stupid link' and should make a judgment as a collective  effort. NIGERIA said the conclusions should reflect that  the IPCC report is not the only report available. CHINA  said a reference to the IPCC report as 'the most  authoritative and comprehensive assessment available'  should be changed to 'useful and comprehensive.' The RUSSIAN FEDERATION said delegates did not have enough  time to analyze the SAR to develop recommendations. SBSTA  should include analysis of proposed commitments in its  timetable. TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO, on behalf of AOSIS, said  paragraph 2 was an attempt to reflect the SBSTA's  consideration of the SAR and supported taking special  note of the findings. Delegates could adjust the list to  ensure all members are comfortable. He welcomed  assessment of protocol proposals as an indication of  desire for strong reductions like those contained in the  AOSIS draft protocol. The EU said paragraph 2 should use  IPCC language, but he endorsed including a list. The  conclusions should state that the situation requires  urgent action at the widest level. NORWAY said paragraph  2 is not a biased selection and supported its inclusion.  CANADA said the SBSTA must identify key findings in the  SAR if it is to provide appropriate advice to the AGBM  and the COP. Deleting paragraph 2 would compromise the  SBSTA's ability to carry out its mandate.

The US said deleting paragraph 2 would mean the SBSTA has  failed miserably in providing guidance. KENYA supported  retention of paragraph 2 using IPCC language. If no  agreement was reached, the IPCC reports could be annexed  to the decision. AUSTRALIA supported retaining the  reference to 'most authoritative and comprehensive' as  well as paragraph 2. A sub-point in the paragraph should  mention uncertainties. The UK supported including  paragraph 2.

The question of whether to include a list of highlights  from the SAR dominated informal debate Friday afternoon.  Saudi Arabia, China, Costa Rica, on behalf of the G-77/China, Iran, Venezuela, India and Kuwait said that  developing countries did not have the time to analyze the  SAR and that the list of highlights would bias the  SBSTA's conclusions against those countries that did not  have the opportunity to evaluate the report. Switzerland,  Norway, the US, the UK, the Marshall Islands, Uzbekistan,  and Trinidad and Tobago, on behalf of AOSIS, supported  including a list, noting that the SBSTA should indicate  that the SAR had important messages for policy makers.  The Chair suggested that the list of highlights be moved  from the meeting's conclusions to the report, indicating  that many countries said the highlighted SAR conclusions  were important. The conclusions would say that the SAR  required further study and consideration by the SBSTA.  China, the US and Trinidad and Tobago supported the  Chair's suggestion to move the highlights to the report.  Saudi Arabia, supported by China, said the report would  need to reflect the views of delegations that believe the  highlights are selective and out of context. Delegates  suggested minor changes to other paragraphs in the  document.

A contact group led by Evans King (Trinidad and Tobago)  negotiated the report sections and conclusions on  scientific assessment over the weekend. The draft  conclusions on consideration of the SAR  (FCCC/SBSTA2/CRP.1) say that the SAR was considered to be  an important scientifically-based, comprehensive  analysis. They recognize that the IPCC would have to  provide further technical inputs and agree that the  findings and projections of the SAR should be made  available in a suitable form to different audiences with  special attention to impacts and circumstances at the  national level.

The draft proceedings on consideration of the SAR  (FCCC/SBSTA2/CRP.2) state that some delegations drew  attention to important findings that they felt should be  communicated to Convention bodies, particularly the AGBM,  and that these delegations felt the findings underlined  the necessity for urgent mitigation action. The  proceedings reference the IPCC report's 15 findings  including that: atmospheric GHG and aerosol  concentrations are increasing largely because of human  activities; the balance of evidence suggests a  discernible human influence on global climate; a 2ยบ  Celsius global mean surface air temperature rise is  projected relative to 1990 by 2100 without specific  mitigation measures; average sea level is projected to  rise 50 cm. by 2100; stabilization at twice pre- industrial levels will require global emissions less than  50% of current levels; temperature and sea level would  continue to rise even if GHG concentrations were  stabilized in 2100; projected climate change will  adversely impact ecological systems and socioeconomic  sectors, sometimes irreversibly; developing countries and  small islands are typically more vulnerable; significant  emissions are technically possible and economically  feasible; no regrets opportunities are available in most  countries and risk of damage, risk aversion and the  precautionary principle are rationales for action beyond  no regrets; a portfolio of measures can reduce net  emissions from all sectors; flexible policies using  economic incentives and instruments can reduce mitigation  and adaptation costs or increase cost effectiveness;  equity considerations are important; and uncertainties  remain and work is needed to reduce them.

The proceedings note that other delegations said it is  very premature to highlight conclusions contained in the  SAR, and that the list is highly selective, limited and  presents a biased view of the SAR. These delegations  suggested that a preliminary review of the SAR indicated  inter alia that: the highlighted conclusion on  discernible human influence selectively quotes the IPCC  and fails to note uncertainty in key factors on  quantifying human influence including natural  variability; the estimated temperature increase is one- third below the 1990 IPCC best estimate; the estimated  sea level rise is 25% below the 1990 best estimate; there  are inadequate data to determine whether consistent  global changes in climate variability or weather extremes  have occurred over the 20th century; uncertainties and  factors currently limit our ability to project and detect  future climate change; the conclusion on food supply  impacts is misleading because studies show global  agricultural production could be maintained in the face  of climate change; IPCC Working Group III put great value  on better information about climate change processes and  impacts and responses and that the synthesis report  called attention to large differences in the cost of  reducing emissions and enhancing sinks due to countries  economic development, infrastructure choices and natural  resource base.

The conclusions and proceedings were adopted at the final  SBSTA plenary as part of what SBSTA Chair Tibor Farago  called a 'fragile package.'

### COOPERATION WITH THE IPCC

In the morning of Wednesday,  28 February, SBSTA Vice-Chair Soobaraj Nayroo Sok Appadu  (Mauritius) opened discussions on scientific cooperation.  The US, supported by UZBEKISTAN, said IPCC technical  reports should address a variety of gas mixes, time  horizons and stabilization levels, use simple models to  predict mean temperature change and sea-level rise at 10- year intervals, and evaluate the technical feasibility of  each profile. Supported by SAUDI ARABIA, he said another  report could address the effects of various emissions  limitation proposals, including the AOSIS draft protocol,  assessing the technical feasibility and range of cost for  each proposal. The IPCC should continue to lead inventory  efforts.

The RUSSIAN FEDERATION said the SBSTA should analyze the  SAR and elaborate a proposal for implementation of  priority measures. The IPCC should move from global to  regional scenarios and forecasts, including a scientific  evaluation of dangerous effects on the climate system.  Regional seminars should be added on regional effects.  The NETHERLANDS said the documents are already made for  policy makers, so there is no need for further  simplification of IPCC documents by the SBSTA.

INDIA said the IPCC should continue to synthesize science  and technical research, not stray into policy measures or  national technologies. He supported regional workshops,  with an Asian regional meeting in India. VENEZUELA said  the IPCC should look at the social and economic  consequences of a protocol or legal instrument of new  commitments for Annex I countries and how new commitments  can help avoid temperature and sea-level rise. CHINA said  global projections alone are far from enough for  countries and regions to formulate policies and  strategies.

SAUDI ARABIA stressed assessment of the economic impacts  of possible protocols on all Parties, especially  developing countries. UGANDA said the question is how SBI  and SBSTA can establish regional research institutions,  especially in less developed areas like Africa. ITALY, on  behalf of the EU, said the IPCC should continue as the  primary body providing independent assessments, reviewing  published literature and developing methodologies and  guidelines. SBSTA should look at operational issues and  technical aspects of specific policy questions. He called  for a technical paper on interpreting scenarios, pathways  and timetables to stabilization, and an assessment of  options relevant to the AGBM.

KUWAIT said it is important to focus on the economic  impacts of any proposals for new commitments, and on the  reduction in change in temperature and sea-level rise  that can be achieved. A summary should not reinterpret  the SAR. The INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY said  delegates should consider the role of nuclear power in  reducing climate change. CANADA supported looking at  criteria for determining dangerous interference, as well  as emphasis on social and economic impacts, especially in  developing countries, and on the impact of response  options on employment, inflation and other economic  factors. MALAYSIA recommended that SBSTA prepare a list  of adaptation technologies and consider mechanisms to  enhance dissemination of experience on adaptation  technology. SBSTA should further elaborate the impact of  economic instruments on developing countries and provide  guidance on how regional scenarios can be developed.  EGYPT said the IPCC should continue to assess impacts on  vulnerable regions. NEW ZEALAND said the SAR should be  referred in its entirety to the COP and the AGBM. He  supported the recommended special topic reports and  workshops for 1996, especially on coral reefs.

POLAND said guidelines for adaptation measures are needed  as well as for inventories. ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA asked  whether, as indicated by the IPCC Chair's summary, it was  impossible to stabilize atmospheric concentrations at 450  ppm equivalent. He noted that while the level could be  difficult to avoid it was not impossible. IPCC Chair  Bolin said with current GHG concentrations at about 420- 430 ppm, it is impossible not to exceed 450 ppm at some  point, but not impossible to stabilize eventually at that  level. TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO, on behalf of AOSIS, said the  SAR already shows dangerous climate interference. ARMENIA  called for a study of methane emissions from municipal  dumps and work on the use of municipal refuse as fuel.

The draft conclusions on cooperation with the IPCC  (FCCC/SBSTA2/CRP.1) note the IPCC's decisions on a work  programme, particularly the intention to prepare a Third  Assessment Report by 2000 and continue GHG inventory  methodologies. The conclusions request that the IPCC  undertake a work programme, listed in an annex, which  describes activities, products and timetables under a  number of issues. The annex includes work on: regional  scenarios and impacts; full scientific assessments;  detection of climate change; emissions inventory  methodologies; technology transfer and evaluation;  modeling of stabilization scenarios; implications of  emission limitations; impacts of response measures; and  simple climate models. Document FCCC/SBSTA2/CRP.1/Add.1  amends annex sections on modeling of stabilization  scenarios and implications of emission limitations and  adds a section on impacts of response measures. The  conclusions and annex were adopted at the final plenary.

## NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS

### COMMUNICATIONS FROM ANNEX I PARTIES

Delegates considered  the following documents: Part One: Elements of the second  compilation and synthesis report (FCCC/SB/1996/1); Part  Two: Tables of inventories and anthropogenic emissions  and removals in 1990 and projected anthropogenic  emissions in 2000 (FCCC/SB/1996/1/Add.1); Progress report  on in-depth reviews (FCCC/SB/1996/2); and Report on the  guidelines for the preparation of first communications by  Annex I Parties (FCCC/SBSTA/1996/3).

The US recommended that the SBSTA should improve  instructions for subsequent national communications by:  eliminating ambiguity from GHG inventories; including  implementation status and expected effect in the  descriptions of policies and measures; and including all  GHGs in emission projects. The US also expressed  disappointment at the brevity of the status report and  urged the Secretariat to provide a more substantive  assessment. NEW ZEALAND supported the US and stated that  the revised measures should be adopted at COP-2 to be  applied to second national communications.

INDIA noted the projected values for emissions of all  GHGs are substantially higher than 1990 levels, and fall  far short of the Convention's goals. He suggested that if  1994 is the base-year for non-Annex I Parties, then there  should be a set of values for 1994 for Annex I countries  to ensure comparability. JAPAN highlighted the need to  clearly define the time frame for prospective steps in  the guidelines, which should review the performance of  policies and measures and should be more comparable.  POLAND said that economies in transition may have trouble  submitting national inventory data by 15 April 1996.  CANADA supported the further development of guidelines to  improve transparency, consistency, descriptions of  policies and measures, and reporting on technology  cooperation. The MARSHALL ISLANDS, on behalf of AOSIS,  expressed concern about the number of Annex I countries  failing to meet the relatively soft targets for emissions  reductions and supported Japan's proposal to include a  performance review on policies and measures.

The EU supported the proposed 1 April 1996 deadline for  submissions on the approach for the second compilation  and encouraged Annex I Parties with economies in  transition to use 1990 as the base-year as soon their  capabilities permit. He said the underlying assumptions  used in preparing national communications should be  reflected in tables to increase comparability. AUSTRALIA  supported the Secretariat's proposal to include examples  of national circumstances in the second compilation.  URUGUAY expressed concern about the lack of comparability  between Annex I national communications. He proposed that  Annex I countries include a projection for developing  cleaner alternative technology as part of their growth  perspectives.

The Chair noted that many delegates referred to the  original deadline of 15 April and reiterated the  importance of moving the deadline up to 1 April, as  proposed by the Secretariat. The US said there is not  adequate time to accommodate the request and the extra  two weeks is important for providing thoughtful comments.

### COMMUNICATIONS FROM NON-ANNEX I PARTIES

The Secretariat  said the document FCCC/SB/1996/3 deals with guidelines to  be dealt with by SBSTA and other matters.

COSTA RICA, on behalf of the G-77/China, summarized  workshops held 25 and 26 February 1996, on guidelines and  the initial communications of non-Annex I Parties. The  workshops reviewed a possible format and FCCC principles  that should shape the communications. He emphasized the  need to accelerate the provision of financial resources  by the GEF so that lack of resources do not affect the  initial communications.

The G-77/China position paper notes relevant FCCC  Articles on commitments, obligations, national  circumstances, vulnerability and timing, with the latter  emphasizing that non-Annex I Parties' communications are  due either within three years of entry into force for a  Party or upon availability of financial resources.  Regarding inventories, the paper calls for adequate  financial resources, technical support and technology  transfer. It also suggests a flexible methodology and  1994 as the base year. Reports may include adaptation  measures, information on emissions by sources and  removals by sinks, financial resources and technical  support given and required, capacity building and  training needs, and requirements for technology transfer.  A format for communications, included as an annex,  contains sections and guidelines on general  circumstances, special circumstances, inventories of  various gases, a summary, general description of steps,  financial and technological needs and constraints. The  paper expresses disappointment that developed country  Parties have not met commitments on provision of  financial resources. It says there should be no  individual country reviews of non-Annex I communications,  only an aggregate assessment. It requests necessary  assistance for compilation and communication of  information, particularly for a follow-up workshop at the  next SBSTA session.

CHINA, supported by the PHILIPPINES, said no one other  than the G-77/China could change the group's position  paper. He underscored that timing of communications is  tied either to ratification or financial resource  availability. Developing countries need funds to support  measurement, analysis, monitoring and evaluation teams.  INDIA said financial support would also be needed for  institutional capacity building, including monitoring and  research and development for measurement systems. NIGERIA  emphasized the importance of technical capacity building  through training and other necessary financial  assistance.

During informal negotiations, the US and others  questioned whether the G-77/China proposal could be  improved in consistency, transparency and comparability.  ITALY, on behalf of the EU, said the description of  policies and measures should include a section on  mitigation. He said the reference to use of IPCC or other  comparable methodology needed clarification. FRANCE asked  whether the 1994 base year should be different than Annex  I Parties' base year of 1990, and also suggested that  aggregation of reports from non-Annex I Parties did not  preclude the need to collect or analyze individual  countries' reports. JAPAN said the variety of conditions  in developing countries requires flexibility without  compromising other values. He proposed that report  guidelines classify those elements that are mandatory for  inclusion. Projections of GHG emissions should be  included. CANADA said guidelines should be finalized for  recommendation to COP-2 and for early application by some  Parties. IPCC guidelines are preferable and 1990 should  be used as a base year where possible.

COSTA RICA, on behalf of the G-77/China, said  transparency and comparability are seen as fundamental.  The G-77/China position paper is the most non-Annex I  countries can do now. The degree of flexibility permits  countries wishing to provide more information to do so  while those with more difficulties will report what they  can. INDIA said transparency, comparability and  consistency are requirements of science and of all  Parties, but are not totally apparent even in Annex I  Parties' communications. CHINA said no Party had achieved  transparency, comparability, and consistency, and asked  whether is it fair to hold developing countries to  standards others have not met. The MARSHALL ISLANDS said  there is a diversity of situations that require  flexibility. Supported by SRI LANKA, he said developing  country Parties will do what they can to use technology  and report, but will not undertake mitigation measures  until they have taken adequate adaptation measures.

The PHILIPPINES said flexibility does not mean that  Parties pick and choose obligations, but the goal is to  deal with difficulties. MALAYSIA said delegates should  not prejudge transparency, comparability and consistency  until the SBSTA can evaluate the communications.

At the final SBSTA plenary, delegates agreed that the G-77/China position paper (FCCC/SB/1996/MISC.1/Add.1) would  serve as the basis for the adoption of guidelines and  format for preparation of initial communications for non- Annex I Parties.

## ACTIVITIES IMPLEMENTED JOINTLY (AIJ)

A contact group under Diego Malpede (Argentina) held  informal negotiations throughout the week on activities  implemented jointly under the pilot phase. Based on  written submissions from Germany and the US  (FCCC/SBSTA/1996/ Misc.1), they negotiated how reporting  should occur, whether at the programme or project level,  and how monitoring and verification of projects would be  conducted. A draft decision on AIJ was adopted at the  final SBSTA plenary, which adopts an initial reporting  framework for AIJ projects, invites reports from parties  and asks the Secretariat to compile the Parties' reports.  The framework defines who reports, the frequency of  reporting, and contents.

## TECHNOLOGY INVENTORY AND ASSESSMENT

Delegates considered the initial report on an inventory  and assessment of technologies and technology inventory  database (FCCC/SBSTA/1996/4 and Add.1). COP-1, AGBM 1 and  SBSTA requested that the Secretariat prepare an inventory  and assessment of environmentally sound and economically  viable technologies and know-how conducive to mitigating  and adapting to climate change. The Secretariat designed  a database to organize the information that contains  written materials, technical reports, journal articles,  books and reports on conferences and workshops.  Information is also available on institutions,  information centers, databases, and Internet sites. In  introducing the document, the Secretariat requested  guidance from the SBSTA on the objective of future  assessments, the use of information, the types of report  that would be helpful, whether work on adaptation  technologies would benefit from consideration by the IPCC  or the intergovernmental technical advisory panel,  technologies in the research and development stage and  identification of future work.

UNIDO highlighted its study for developing countries on  the impact on climate change response measures on their  industrial development. A multidisciplinary team of  experts is identifying economically viable options for  reducing the rate of growth of GHG emissions while  maintaining growth. The study will undertake four tasks:  a comparative analysis of patterns of energy use, a  review of national and global production and energy  scenarios, an inventory of key industrial energy  efficiency and fuel-switching measures, and a spreadsheet  analysis framework for improving energy efficiency in  developing countries.

The NETHERLANDS, on behalf of the OECD, reported on the  Climate Technology Initiative (CTI), which was  established to assist all interested countries in meeting  the objectives of the UNFCCC. Recent developments  include: new national initiatives for exchange of  experience through voluntary agreements; an international  workshop on methods and approaches for assessing  technology needs; further expansion and linking of IEA's  GREENTIE information system with CC:INFO; and continued  expansion of cooperative research and development  arrangements. The EU reaffirmed the SBSTA's focus on  assessment and identification and said priority should be  given to technologies for developing country  implementation of national programmes, which should take  feasibility into account. INDIA mentioned several other  sources of information available, including databases and  newsletters, and highlighted the importance of electronic  information technology.

MALAYSIA said it is difficult to make full use of the  data available. He called for an intergovernmental panel  to create a cost-effective, one-stop information  clearinghouse to serve the Parties and recommend  guidelines for assessment and future development of the  database. While comprehensive catalogues of technology  are available, many developing countries cannot afford to  search through hundreds of sites and many do not have  Internet access. JAPAN highlighted activities under the  CTI and AIJ. AIJ is important because it promotes  technology transfer and contributes to regional economic  development. He highlighted the Fifth Asian-Pacific  seminar on climate change in Sendai, Japan (23-25 January  1996) and noted the proposals presented, including the  formulation of inventories, the use of local and regional  centers, and technology transfer. CANADA said the highest  priority is preparing national communications, and  supported annual reports on technology assessments. On  adaptation measures, SBSTA should focus on non-Annex I  Parties.

CHINA disagreed with the suggestion that technology  transfer should be linked with AIJ, because AIJ is  supplementary and voluntary, whereas technology transfer  is an obligation. He recalled that COP-1 Decision 13  calls for an itemized progress report on Annex I Parties,  and urged Parties who have not done so to include  technology transfer efforts in their national  communications. He suggested that non-Annex I Parties  specify the technologies they need most.

The US called for the development of an ongoing work plan  on technologies and consideration of the host of  organizations that can contribute. He urged Parties to  agree on the allocation of technical work among the  various organizations, such as the IPCC, CTI and TAPs. He  highlighted the structure of the database and the value  of submissions by the private sector and said the report  demonstrates the need for effort on specialized  information.

IRAN stated that this information should be produced in a  manner that covers the demand of countries. He called for  establishment of a worldwide information network and  database and the strengthening of existing data networks  within countries. The Chair noted that many comments  requested consideration of technology transfer, but said  this element is for the SBI. The guidelines for Annex II  Parties should be provided by SBSTA. He also noted a  'clear' message that a further survey is necessary. The  SBSTA conclusions urge Parties to provide the Secretariat  with information and databases on technology and know- how, requests that the Secretariat continue its  activities in this area and identify information sources  and gaps on technology information centers with a view to  developing a plan to set up specialized centers. The  conclusions also request that the Secretariat develop a  paper for the SBSTA on terms of technology transfer.

## LONGER-TERM ACTIVITIES

The Chair said it was necessary to make long-term plans  and report to COP-2. He asked delegates for advice on  preparations for the next SBSTA session. CANADA requested  that the Secretariat prepare a document on a longer-term  programme. MALAYSIA said the Secretariat should consider  how the SBSTA would provide advice on international  research programmes, and research and observation  systems. The SBSTA final plenary adopted a decision with  dates of future sessions.

## SBSTA FINAL PLENARY

### WORKSHOP ON MECHANISMS FOR NGO INPUTS

The SBSTA heard a  report on views expressed at the NGO workshop held over  the weekend. The workshop originated from a New Zealand  proposal to establish a business consultative mechanism  whereby different sectors could discuss commitments to  emissions reductions. The NGOs representing business  interests said a business consultative mechanism should  provide business with a convenient, direct and effective,  additional channel of communication, further enable  business to provide information in timely manner, and be  open to all business NGOs accredited by the FCCC process.  Representatives from the local authorities wanted  intergovernmental organization observer status and  stressed the importance of local Agenda 21s. The  environmental NGOs said there was no need for a new  mechanism for input, only better use of existing  mechanisms such as access to the floor, written proposals  and interventions in discussions. They said delegations  should include NGO representatives and that NGOs could  also be involved in technical advisory bodies.

### NGO PARTICIPATION

The SBSTA was also informed of  consultations by the Bureau of the COP on NGO  participation. They agreed, for SBSTA meetings, to  provide constituencies with three seats on the floor; one  each for environmental, local authorities and business  NGOs. The Chair characterized this as a practical  approach to the problem. Saudi Arabia said that while he  respected the decision of the provisional Bureau of the  COP, there should be a full discussion on this issue at  the next meeting before taking a substantive decision.  The Chair said this decision was within the mandate of  the Bureau, not SBSTA, and noted it did not allow access  to the floor, but only three additional seats. It noted  that this was a 'test phase' limited only to SBSTA.

### LONGER TERM ACTIVITIES

Delegates adopted a paragraph on  future SBSTA meetings scheduling SBSTA-4 in December 1996  and SBSTA-5 in late February or early March 1997.

### REPORT OF THE SESSION

Delegates then discussed the draft  reports contained in FCCC/SBSTA/1996/L.1, the draft  report of the SBSTA on its second session;  FCCC/SBSTA/L.1/Add.1, the draft report on the Second  Assessment Report of the IPCC and cooperation with the  IPCC; and FCCC/SBSTA/1996/L.1/Add.2, the draft report on  the communications from Parties included in Annex I.  Following the Chair's suggestion to adopt the draft  report of SBSTA, CHINA and VENEZUELA objected and made  proposals for including specific elements, but the Chair  replied that the group was only adopting the structure of  report without the substantive elements at this stage,  and that all issues would be considered later in the day.  He also noted a compromise agreement to reflect the  elements of the IPCC report.

CHINA proposed including a paragraph noting the G-77/China's position paper on guidelines for preparing  initial communications from non-Annex I Parties. He said  that the paper was formally introduced and said this  omission was 'deplorable.' TRINIDAD and TOBAGO supported  China and proposed references to the AOSIS statement  throughout the report. The US questioned including a  reference to a position paper, but China insisted the  inclusion was its sovereign right. These suggestions were  brought up again as the group began a section by section  review.

The Secretariat then introduced the draft conclusions of  the SBSTA on technology and inventory assessment  (FCCC/SBSTA2/ CRP.3). The conclusions note the SBSTA's  recognition that the identification of and information on  technologies and know-how could assist the Parties in the  preparation of national plans and requested the  Secretariat to continue its activities related to the  preparation of an inventory of technologies and know-how  conducive to mitigating and adapting to climate change.  The SBSTA also requested that the Secretariat conduct a  survey before SBSTA-3 to identify Parties' needs for  information on mitigation technologies and know-how, and  to prepare an initial catalogue of adaptation  technologies and know-how, including information and  their costs, environmental impacts and implementation  requirements. The SBSTA also requested that the  Secretariat periodically report on new information on  technologies and know-how in the research and development  stage.

The US proposed a reference to continuing coordination  with other relevant bodies. The PHILIPPINES requested  more time to review the document. She noted there was no  mention of her request for information and transfer, not  just know-how, and also noted duplication in some  paragraphs. The Chair noted the mandate of the SBI  addresses facilitation procedures for technology transfer  and that the SBSTA should not give instructions. CHINA  suggested highlighting transfer of technology and  proposed adding a paragraph on Annex II Parties'  activities on technology transfer. The Chair again noted  that technology transfer is mainly the mandate of the  SBI.

MALAYSIA said its proposal had been omitted and added a  reference to setting up a one-stop information center,  providing financial resources, preparing comprehensive  catalogues, disseminating information and assessing the  suitability of technology. COSTA RICA, on behalf of the  G-77/China, also requested more time for review and noted  the number of proposed amendments. A small drafting group  was convened to address the proposals. The group later  reported back with a text containing the amendments. The  Secretariat introduced document FCCC/SBSTA2/CRP.3 and the  suggested amendments, including a reference to  cooperation with other relevant organizations. It also  includes a request to the Secretariat concerning  information on technology and refers to probable time- frames related to the terms of transfer of technology and  know-how currently available.

On national communications from non-Annex I Parties, the  Chair noted the extensive informal consultations, but  also said there had been insufficient time to discuss the  issues and the necessary conclusions had not been  reached. He noted that the SBSTA received a paper from  the G-77/China, contained in document  FCCC/SB/1996/MISC.1/Add.1. INDIA proposed adding a  paragraph stating that the SBSTA adopted this document as  the basis of guidelines and format for preparation of the  initial communications from non-Annex I Parties. The  PHILIPPINES said the proposal intends to send a clear  message for further planning and discussion.

The US said there is a willingness from developing  countries to move forward and suggested noting the non- Annex I work and the workshop that developed the  guidelines. He also proposed an additional meeting aimed  at resolving questions raised and requested that the  Secretariat coordinate with experts from developing  countries. The EU said that they appreciated the efforts  of non-Annex I experts and the G-77/China proposal on  guidelines, but could not accept these substantial  modifications. The meeting was suspended, but delegates  later agreed that SBSTA considered  FCCC/SB/1996/MISC.1/Add.1 the basis for the adoption of  guidelines and format for preparation of initial  communications for non-Annex I Parties. The SBSTA will  continue consideration of this item at its next session.

GHANA, on behalf of the African Group, expressed  disappointment that guidelines for non-Annex I  communications were not adopted and that no contact group  was established to resolve differences between Annex I  and non-Annex I Parties.

The Chair then presented the draft conclusions on an  initial framework for reporting on activities implemented  jointly (AIJ) under the pilot phase. The conclusions note  that Parties may report jointly or separately to the COP.  Reports may be transmitted to the Secretariat at any time  and should be updated, preferably each year. It also  lists the contents of the report, including: description  of the project, governmental acceptance, compatibility  with national economic development, benefits derived and  calculation of the contribution of AIJ projects. CHINA,  the EU and the US debated at length proposed language on  methods for and calculation of an outcome of the  contribution of AIJ projects, with China arguing for  removal of 'methods.' Delegates eventually agreed to  final text referring to calculation of outcomes from AIJ  projects.

Conclusions on national communications by Annex I Parties  (FCCC/SBSTA/1996/L.1/Add.2) were adopted with minor  amendments.

Evans King (Trinidad and Tobago) summarized the results  of negotiations in the contact group on scientific  assessment and cooperation, resulting in conclusions on  scientific assessment and cooperation (FCCC/SBSTA2/CRP.1  and /Add.1) and language for the draft proceedings  (FCCC/SBSTA2/CRP.2). SAUDI ARABIA said the documents are  part of a delicate compromise package and must be adopted  together.

The contact group Chair said there were suggestions for  amendments to the proceedings, but no consensus on the  amendments. The PHILIPPINES said the list of major IPCC  findings should include adverse effects of climate  change, including adaptation and mitigation. JAPAN said  the highlights should mention technical measures that  accelerate technology diffusion and transfer. SRI LANKA  said a reference to low and high economic growth  estimates should preface projections of temperature  change and sea level rise.

The US said economic growth is one of many other factors,  so the text should not be changed. SRI LANKA said the  projections should have a different opening phrase.

The CLIMATE ACTION NETWORK said by placing the scientific  findings in its proceedings but not in conclusions, the  SBSTA was falling short of its duty to provide scientific  advice to other FCCC bodies.

The conclusions and proceedings were adopted.

The Chair then read the draft conclusions on the  Technical Assessment Panels (TAPs): SBSTA recognizes that  the TAPs have potential to make an important contribution  to processes under the Convention and to the  implementation of the Convention by Parties, in  particular by providing an opportunity to draw upon a  broad range of expertise available in Parties. However,  at this stage the SBSTA could not agree on modalities and  has decided to request guidance from next session of the  COP on this issue.

COSTA RICA, on behalf of G-77/China, said the basic  principle for choosing TAP members should be based on  regional representation. He said the G-77/China never  tried to block the process or stop progress. The  selection procedure must be clear, transparent and  intergovernmental. Experts should be appointed by  governments but may come from any sector. He requested  that the G-77/China position be annexed to the decision.  GHANA, on behalf of the African Group, expressed  disappointment at the inability to reach agreement. The  decision was adopted.

The PHILIPPINES said it was not the G-77/China that  blocked establishment of the TAPs. CHINA said the G-77/China paper reflects the serious effort made to  facilitate a decision. The US was also saddened by  failure to resolve the TAPs and requested that its  proposal also be annexed.

JAPAN regretted the lack of decision on TAPs and  suggested considering initiating a process with a roster  of experts. Delegates discussed this suggestion, and  URUGUAY said the Secretariat could prepare a paper on  relevant disciplines for the TAPs. The Chair asked that  the Secretariat collect and compile Parties' comments for  the next SBSTA session. The SBSTA adjourned.

# SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION

The SBI met from 27 February to 4 March 1996 and held  informal consultations for three days during the  following week (during the AGBM meeting) on issues  related to the relocation of the Secretariat to Bonn and  arrangements for COP-2. A special session was held on  Friday, 8 March, to adopt the conclusions.

SBI Vice-Chair Bert Metz (the Netherlands), on behalf of  Chair Mohamed M. Ould El Ghaouth (Mauritania) welcomed  delegates to the opening session. The Executive  Secretary, Michael Zammit-Cutajar, referred to his  statement at the opening of SBSTA, which was also  pertinent to SBI, and highlighted two issues on the  agenda: the legal arrangements for the relocation of the  Secretariat to Bonn and the political aspects of the  preparations for COP-2.

## NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS

On communications from Parties included in Annex I, the  Secretariat introduced the following documents: Part One:  Elements of the second compilation and synthesis report  (FCCC/SB/1996/1); Part Two: Tables of inventories of  anthropogenic emissions and removals in 1990 and  projected anthropogenic emissions in 2000 (  FCCC/SB/1996/Add.1) and Progress report on in-depth  reviews (FCCC/SB/1996/2).

The EU commended the reviews and supported the  Secretariat's proposal to compile information for years  subsequent to 1990. The second report should also include  a table indicating specific targets set by Parties,  provide information on the costs of policies and measures  and focus on innovative and successful examples. He  proposed an informal workshop at SBI-3 to exchange views  and experiences on implementation of national programmes.

The US said that the reporting process could be improved  by increasing transparency, comparability and consistency  through more specific guidelines. Communications could  also be improved by resolving reporting inconsistencies  on topics such as temperature adjustments, electricity  imports and global warming potentials. Reporting data in  electronic form would reduce the workload of the  Secretariat. JAPAN called for a more clearly defined in- depth review process. The process should strengthen the  formality of policies and measures (P&M) and report on  their performance to allow for international monitoring  of commitments. Guidelines could be improved by providing  more illustrative guidance on inventories of GHGs, more  comparable formats for P&M and more detailed descriptions  of technical and financial cooperation.

The NETHERLANDS stressed the importance of exchanging  experiences and supported the EU-proposed informal  workshop. NORWAY supported the US call for greater  consistency in reviews.

ARGENTINA noted there was no communication from the EU  listed in the document. The EU later expressed regret at  not being in a position to deliver a communication  because three new members joined the EU in January 1995.  Their individual national communications had to be  accounted for and an overview has been submitted.  Individual EU members have already submitted their own  reports, which provides a good indication of EU efforts.

On 1 March, delegates reviewed the draft conclusions  proposed by the SBI Bureau. The conclusions noted that  SBI, inter alia: invited SBSTA to consider ways of  enhancing transparency, comparability and consistency  through more specific guidelines; concluded that  mechanisms should be explored to facilitate the exchange  of experiences in carrying out national programmes, and  took note of data indicating that many Annex I Parties  will have to make additional efforts in order to return  GHG emissions to 1990 levels by 2000. The SBI also  requested the Secretariat to convene an informal workshop  in conjunction with SBI-4 to focus on implementation  aspects of P&M.

ARMENIA replaced a reference to returning to '1990'  levels with 'base year' levels, in light of the COP  decision providing flexibility for countries with  economies in transition. Delegates debated a proposal  from CHINA for specifying 'Annex I' whenever 'Parties'  were mentioned. The US supported applying the amendment  throughout the document, but argued that this change,  when referring to the workshop, would limit participation  and subject matter. Delegates accepted the conclusions as  amended. CLIMATE ACTION NETWORK said there is no evidence  that the SBI is systematically taking stock of the  ongoing process and producing conclusions on the state of  implementation by Annex I Parties.

## FINANCIAL AND TECHNICAL COOPERATION

The SBI then discussed matters related to the financial  mechanism and a progress report on technical and  financial cooperation. Delegates considered a report on  arrangements between the COP and the operating entity or  entities of the financial mechanism: information on  relevant action by the GEF Council (FCCC/SBI/1996/3).  Delegates also considered a progress report on the  activities of the Secretariat concerning technical and  financial support (FCCC/SBI/1996/4). The report covers  activities related to information exchange, training and  capacity building, networking and financial arrangements.

The US said it is vital that the financial mechanism move  swiftly to meet the agreed full costs to developing  country Parties in their efforts to prepare national  communications.

COSTA RICA, on behalf of the G-77/China, said the  implementation efforts of the developing countries will  depend on the actions of developed countries. The  resource flows to the GEF and developing countries must  be accelerated or there will be delays in national  communications. He noted that the arrangement between the  COP and the operating entity of the financial mechanism  contained unrealistic norms and stressed the need for  greater emphasis on energy conservation and efficiency.

SAUDI ARABIA stated that an endorsement from the SBI  would require line-by-line consideration and noted that  the operational strategy was not exactly aligned with the  COP decision on programmes, priorities and guidelines. He  warned that operational programmes to expand markets for  technologies may endanger the availability of funding and  the functioning of GEF. He also questioned the  operational programme's intent to 'remove barriers to  implementation.' The EU favored making mitigation  measures the strategic option for the GEF and placed  highest priority on long-term activities. He said the  initial phase must emphasize enabling activities. Short- term projects should receive a lower share of financial  resources, and must be cost-effective, likely to succeed  and country-driven. SENEGAL said technical and financial  support was vital for non-Annex I Parties' preparation of  preliminary national communications. IRAN said that an  over-emphasis on long-term activities must not undermine  the short-term activities in developing countries.  Regarding the adoption of renewable energy and removing  barriers, he said any measure taken, including unilateral  ones, must not be a disguised restriction on  international trade.

INDIA noted that national communications are not just  part of a process, but are a basis for sustainable  development. The effort for national communications will  only work if full costs are made available because a  national communication is not a feasibility study but a  real appraisal. On long-term measures, he said GEF  projects should be assessed in terms of sustainable  development achieved and noted that the Convention is not  limited to global benefits. CHINA stressed the need for  more financial resources and said that activities should  not be confined to information exchange and training, but  should provide technical and financial support. Efforts  should be made to expedite developing countries'  projects. SWITZERLAND stated, on the objective of  eliminating obstacles, that care must be used to ensure  that all actions are acceptable. She said rules that  would work to the detriment of the poorest countries  should not be adopted. She stressed the need to reduce  the long-term cost of technologies low in GHG production  and to provide conditions for technology transfer.

BRAZIL noted the commitment to provide financial  resources but said that no resources had been received to  date. While awaiting resources, internal steps have been  taken, such as producing a World Wide Web page on  Brazil's national communication. The SBI should guide the  GEF in its preparation of a standard project package and  noted that the GEF Council should consider that financing  national communications is not a one-time operation.  PANAMA called for more information on activities so that  Parties are not dependent on second-hand news. He also  expressed interest in the activities under the CC:TRAIN  programme. CANADA and GERMANY noted the importance of  electronic dissemination of information and encouraged  further expansion.

The Secretariat said that the timing of funding is  important and that the US and the G-77/China gave the  same message. He also noted, as the EU and Brazil stated,  that national communications are not a one-time event. As  for China and Senegal's call to speed up the process, the  Secretariat said a 'jump start' is close to 'short- circuit,' but CC:FORUM is designed to help. This item was  discussed in a series of informal meetings chaired by  Amb. John Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda). On 1 March,  delegates considered the results of these consultations.

The draft conclusions stated that the SBI took note of  the actions of the GEF Council, in particular the  adoption of its operational strategy. The SBI also  concluded, inter alia, that the GEF should provide  expeditious support for the preparation of national  communication by developing countries, take into account  that the preparation of national communications is a  continuing process, and implement enabling activities and  expedite the disbursement of resources. Regarding  financial and technical cooperation, SBI instructed the  Secretariat to prepare a report for its next session on  possibilities for strengthening and expanding CC:INFO and  CC:FORUM to support the preparation of non-Annex I Party  national communications. SAUDI ARABIA objected to the  reference to the adoption of the operational strategy,  but FRANCE stated that the phrase was essential.  Delegates adopted the conclusions and added that the SBI  took note of the relevant GEF Council action, including  the adoption by the GEF Council of its operational  strategy.

## INSTITUTIONAL AND BUDGETARY MATTERS

The Secretariat introduced document FCCC/SBI/1996/6,  Implementation of decision 14/CP.1 on the institutional  linkage of the Convention Secretariat to the UN and  budget-related matters. The document includes information  on the endorsement of the linkage by the General  Assembly, the establishment of the Permanent Secretariat  and the arrangements for administrative support and  conference services. It also includes the Convention  budget for 1996.

The Secretariat introduced the arrangements for the  relocation of the Secretariat to Bonn (FCCC/SBI/1996/7).  The document deals with legal arrangements for the  Secretariat and notes that because the Secretariat is not  a subsidiary body of the UN, the legal regime of the UN  cannot be extended automatically. The document includes  advice from the UN Office of Legal Affairs that cites the  action taken by the Montreal Protocol in a similar  situation. The move to Bonn is scheduled to begin in  August 1996. The report proposed that the SBI adopt a  decision similar to the Montreal Protocol or endorse the  intention of the Executive Secretary to sign an agreement  that applies the terms of the UN/Germany agreement. The  EU suggested postponement of the decision until the next  meeting of the SBI. The group held informal consultations  on this item for the remainder of the week and produced a  draft decision. On Friday, 8 March, the SBI adopted  conclusions submitted by the Chair in a special session  convened during the AGBM meeting. In the conclusions, the  SBI, inter alia, requests the Executive Secretary to  enter in to an appropriate agreement for the effective  discharge of the Secretariat's function in Germany.

## ARRANGEMENTS FOR COP-2

The Secretariat introduced document FCCC/SBI/1996/8 on  arrangements for COP-2. The issues related to COP-2  include whether to convene a high-level or ministerial  segment and the need to select the Bureau. The  Secretariat noted that COP-1 did not adopt its rules of  procedure but decided the President of COP-1 should  conduct consultations and report back at COP-2.

With regard to the need for high-level political  participation, some delegates said that ministerial  attendance was needed to stress the importance of the  meeting. Others said ministerial involvement should not  be overused.

Regarding the composition of the Bureau, SAUDI ARABIA  said that the rules of procedure cannot be 'applied'  forever. GERMANY said the President of the COP has raised  this issue at every Bureau meeting since COP-1 and used  other opportunities for discussion. She said the  President of the COP will hold consultations prior to  COP-2. The Chair of SBI convened informal consultations  on the ministerial segment and the Bureau.

On 1 March, delegates recommended allowing more time for  consideration of the ministerial segment and postponed  the decision until after the AGBM. The US said a  ministerial segment is desirable and useful. It would  focus attention on the SAR and generate increased public  awareness and support. The EU said that the preparations  should focus on policy-making, and there should be a  ministerial segment aimed at providing guidance to  activities under the Convention. TRINDAD AND TOBAGO, on  behalf of AOSIS, supported a ministerial segment. FRANCE  noted there is not yet a final decision from the EU and  said the group will have to spend a week preparing for a  ministerial segment Regarding the composition of the Bureau, the Chair noted  a preliminary list of representatives. The COP-2  presidency falls to the African Group. Senegal, on behalf  of the African Group, announced that Zimbabwe will  preside over COP-2. He also supported that the current  SBI Chair continue his post during the elections at COP- 2.

The topic of a ministerial segment at the COP and the  composition of the Bureau were revisited at the SBI's  final plenary and during a special session of the SBI  convened on the final day of the AGBM.

## TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY

The Secretariat introduced a note by the Secretariat on  transfer of technology (FCCC/SBI/1996/5). It contains a  progress report on technology transfer by Annex II  Parties in response to Decision 13 of COP-1. The report  notes that the national communications of Annex II  Parties were based on guidelines for the preparation of  first communications by Annex I Parties, but also states  that the section of the guidelines on technology transfer  is very general and subject to different interpretations.  As a result, the information in Annex II communications  differs considerably in format, comprehensiveness and  level of detail and a complete picture of technology  transfer is not available. The report notes possible  issues for consideration by the SBI, particularly  clarifying the levels of comprehensiveness, comparability  and detail needed for the national communications due in  1997.

MALAYSIA noted there is an enormous amount of information  available in many centers and in many forms and said any  future compilation on technology transfer should provide  sufficient information to explain how the projects or  activities fully meet the objective of the Convention. He  suggested a short paper on implementation on the two  decisions of COP-1. CHINA noted that communications from  Annex II Parties failed to elaborate on technology  transfer and said the provisions on technology transfer  in the Convention have not been satisfactorily  implemented. Since communications failed to mention  standard methods, the Secretariat should prepare a  document containing relevant information, including:  technical features, cost analysis and environment. As  priority areas, the reduction of emissions should focus  on substitute technology; enhancement of sinks should  focus on forest management; and adaptation should focus  on disaster prevention.

The EU said the SBI should ask the SBSTA for  clarification on comprehensiveness and comparability.  SWITZERLAND described an international expert meeting for  assessing and meeting technology needs, which was co- sponsored by the Netherlands. The meeting discussed  possible methodology and terminology for non-Annex I  Parties regarding technology transfer. She said that the  final report will be communicated to UN Commission on  Sustainable Development. COSTA RICA, on behalf of the G-77/China, recalled that developing countries had fought  for Decision 13 in Berlin, but noted that the whole  process was moving too slowly. He disagreed strongly with  attempts to link technology transfer to the issue of  activities implemented jointly. Technology transfer  should be discussed in reports with clear evaluations of  activities.

The US said that much more useful information is  available than is reported in national communications.  While it is crucial for implementation to increase the  speed of transfer, Parties must deal with the reality  that the private sector plays a critical role.  Governments can support technology transfer, but they are  not the main engines for advances and innovations. He  called for improving the quality of information,  incorporating private sector activities into  communications, and encouraging investment in better  technology. He recalled that Decision 13 urges all  Parties to report their activities and that non-Annex I  countries can share information on their needs and  priorities. CANADA urged addressing all relevant sectors  and GHGs in the reports and specifying those intended to  reduce GHGs and those to enhance sinks. IRAN noted that  the definition of technology transfer in the report fails  to include know-how. He said it is not logical that the  private sector is regarded in the same status as  governments because it could not be expected to act on  the same obligations as the governments.

INDIA said that technology transfer was envisaged as a  primary mover in the Convention's implementation, but the  spotlight has shifted to the softer side of technology  transfer such as capacity building and information  networks. He said the question of terms of transfer  should not become dormant, and noted there are monopolies  in certain technologies. There should be a review of  transfer mechanisms that recognize constraints, such as  lack of accessible information on the range of  technologies, poor understanding of regulations, poor  information on the receiving country, and lack of  effective brokering to facilitate appropriate technology.  The NETHERLANDS said the Convention should focus on all  issues, but take a phased approach. He drew attention to  existing information systems such as GREENTIE and the  UNEP clearinghouse. The MARSHALL ISLANDS noted the  statements calling for urgent progress in reporting  technology transfer activities from developed countries  when technology transfer has been halted or denied for  political reasons. Recent events should be reported, such  as when countries were denied valuable tools for  sustainable development because they objected to nuclear  testing near sensitive atolls. SLOVENIA noted that Annex  I activities alone are not enough. Countries with  economies in transition view technology transfer as an  important and delicate issue that should be given as high  a priority as possible.

The CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC said that it, like other  developing countries, doesn't have much to give. Meeting  its commitments requires the developed world to transfer  technologies and make clean technology accessible. KENYA  noted that the subject has not been adequately considered  and said a high level of transparency is needed. FRANCE  noted contradictory messages condemning and calling for  French aid.

Following informal consultations chaired by Daniel  Reifsnyder (US), the SBI adopted draft conclusions that  state, inter alia, that the SBI: recognized the need to  improve the comprehensiveness, comparability and detail  of information provided by Annex II Parties; recognized  the complementary roles of the public and private sectors  and urged improved private sector participation;  requested SBSTA to prepare recommendations on the  guidelines for national communications by Annex I Parties  for consideration at SBI-3; requested that the  Secretariat prepare a report on technology transfer  cooperation by the private sector; and invited Parties to  submit comments on this subject by 1 April 1996.

## FINAL SBI PLENARY

The Chair reported that the decision on a ministerial  segment for COP-2 was still pending. A Bureau meeting had  been held and consultations were still underway. With  regard to the Bureau, COSTA RICA, on behalf of the Latin  American and Caribbean Group (GRULAC), said it will put  forward Argentina (Chair of the AGBM), Antigua and  Barbuda, and Costa Rica (Vice-Chair). IRAN, on behalf of  the Asian Group, said that if there were any allocation,  the Asian Group was the largest and should have a  proportional share of the Bureau. SENEGAL asked if this  action meant the Bureau will be expanded. COSTA RICA  replied that although currently one individual was  serving in two capacities, as the Chair of AGBM and Vice- President of the Conference, they did not consider the  posts to be linked. SENEGAL replied that the quality of  leadership was not the issue, but principle of expanding  the Bureau. VENEZUELA asked whether the group should open  this debate and said there will be a Bureau meeting in  due course.

The Chair said there will not be a meeting until the day  before COP-2. This question has been allocated to the  subsidiary bodies and the place for registering the  claims of the regional groups is here. Asia has asked for  an additional seat and Africa has raised an additional  question. The Chair asked whether the other regional  groups accepted the request of GRULAC to split the post.  MALI endorsed the comments of Senegal and asked if the  rules of procedure can be indefinitely extended. URUGUAY  said there were no criteria on whether the Chairs of the  subsidiary bodies has to sit on the Bureau and asked if  there had been any progress on the rules of procedure  concerning the composition of Bureau with 10 or 11  members. The SBI Chair said the membership of the  subsidiary bodies' Chairs in the Bureau has been under  consideration for two years. The question was whether to  allow this rule to continue in force, or to release the  Chair of the AGBM.

SAUDI ARABIA said that all delegations realize that the  rules of procedure have not been adopted and that there  is an official request to grant equal representation. He  asked if this issue will be decided at the beginning of  COP-2. The Chair said the current President of the COP is  aware of the issue and is considering it. SAUDI ARABIA  said that there should be a decision on the issue or the  Bureau will automatically have 12 members, and his group  will make nominations in that regard. He said that  holding one COP without representing his group's  interests was more than enough. NIGERIA said if the  Bureau is to be expanded the African Group will make its  own request because it has the most members. The Chair  proposed postponing this issue and invited the  spokespersons of the regional groups to consult.

On matters arising from sessions of other bodies, SBI  considered the conclusions of the SBSTA on a reporting  framework for activities implemented jointly under the  pilot phase. The SBSTA did not complete its conclusions  in time for full consideration, and the SBI will revisit  the issue at its next session. The SBI agreed to note the  SBSTA conclusions and request a progress report from the  Secretariat. The Executive Secretary noted that an AIJ  report will require considerable time if produced in all  UN languages. He reminded delegates of the request for  contributions.

On communications from non-Annex I Parties, the SBI had  before it issues related to the preparation, compilation  and consideration of communications (FCCC/SB/1996/3) and  the position paper of the G-77/China on recommendations  for guidelines and format for the preparation of initial  communications from non-Annex I Parties  (FCCC/SB/1996/Misc.1/Add.1). The Chair presented draft  conclusions stating, inter alia, that the SBI took note  of these documents and the decision of SBSTA to consider  the G-77/China's proposal as the principal basis for the  adoption of guidelines and format for preparation of  initial communications for non-Annex I Parties. The draft  conclusions also recall SBI conclusions on matters  related to the financial mechanism, invite non-Annex I  Parties to nominate national focal points for  facilitating assistance and request the Secretariat to  continue to facilitate assistance to non-Annex I Parties  by organizing fora for the exchange of experiences and  information.

The G-77/China proposed an amendment noting that the SBI  considered the document FCCC/SB/1996/Misc.1/Add.1 the  principal basis for the process of implementation of the  guidelines and format for preparation of initial  communications from non-Annex I Parties. The proposal  also states that the SBI noted the request of non-Annex I  Parties to conduct a workshop as a follow-up to the  earlier one to address the issues relating to  implementation and requests that the Secretariat  facilitate assistance in this regard. The NETHERLANDS  noted that the SBSTA refers to the G-77/China document as  the basis for adoption, whereas this proposal refers to  it as the basis for implementation. INDIA said the G-77/China proposal provides more details and places the  SBSTA's work in the context of implementation. For non- Annex I countries to begin work, they need an indication  from the SBI. Without this, the non-Annex I countries  cannot be faulted for not starting work.

The US said that referring to implementation was moving  too fast because the guidelines are not yet approved. He  proposed to note the intention and request and insert the  two sentences as a bis paragraph. He said non-Annex I  countries should not be hostage to the guidelines and  those countries who can proceed should do so.

The PHILIPPINES said the G-77/China wanted to tailor a  response to the SBI. At the SBSTA meeting, discussion  centered on adoption, which required a decision, but here  it is implementation. She said the G-77/China-proposed  workshop covered not only guidelines but exchange of  information. The US, supported by the EU, proposed  changing the language to 'facilitate the implementation  of the reporting commitments of non-Annex I countries.'  The G-77/China, the US and India continued to discuss the  language in a small group. Delegates agreed on text  stating that the SBI considered the G-77/China proposal  as the basis for the decision to adopt and implement  guidelines and format for preparing initial  communications. The SBI also noted the intention of non- Annex I Parties to conduct a workshop.  The SBI adopted  the outline of the report of the meeting  (FCCC/SBI/1996/L.1).

## SPECIAL SESSION OF SBI

During the special session of SBI on 8 March 1996, the  Chair introduced an addendum to the draft report of the  meeting containing his draft conclusions on arrangements  for COP-2 (FCCC/SBI/1996/L.1/Add.4.) The conclusions note  that SBI welcomed the designation of Chen.  Chimutengwende, Minister of Environment and Tourism of  Zimbabwe, for the Presidency of COP-2. SBI also welcomed  the support given to holding a ministerial segment of  COP-2 and concluded it should be held on 17-18 July 1996.  SAUDI ARABIA, supported by VENEZUELA and KUWAIT, objected  that no new or substantial issues were slated for  discussion and questioned whether the meeting warranted  ministerial attendance. He proposed a 'high-level,'  rather than ministerial segment to allow flexibility. The  EU said that its ministers had met in Brussels and agreed  to a ministerial segment. He said ministerial  participation would build political involvement. The US  said the ministers should reflect on the IPCC findings  and focus public attention on the issue. GHANA, on behalf  of the African Group, said the Convention had gathered  momentum since COP-1 and a ministerial segment will  continue this. SAMOA, on behalf of AOSIS, said the  ministers should review the progress and assist in moving  forward.

JAPAN stated that many Asian countries favor a  ministerial segment. UGANDA said a ministerial segment  would allow an exchange of views and experiences and  could give Parties the will to move forward on Convention  responsibilities. The Chair suspended discussion to  consider other issues.

The conclusions also note that the SBI received the  following candidatures for the officers of the Bureau for  COP-2. The African Group nominated the current Chair of  the SBI. The Eastern European Group nominated one Vice  President (Russian Federation) and the current Chair of  the SBSTA. The conclusions note that the Asian Group, the  Latin American and Caribbean Group and the Group of  Western European and Other States (WEOG) were not yet  able to present their candidates for the COP-2 Bureau.  The SBI took note that no nominations had been received  for the Rapporteur, which is subject to geographical  rotation. It invited the President of the COP to conduct  further consultations on the election of Officers of the  Bureau. TURKEY, on behalf of WEOG, said the group will  maintain the current Vice Presidency of the SBI. For the  COP-2 Bureau, he nominated Tony Clark (Canada) and  Cornelia Quennet-Theilen (Germany). TRINIDAD and TOBAGO,  on behalf of AOSIS, nominated Mr. Tuiloma Neroni Slade  (Samoa). IRAN, on behalf of the Asian Group, said his  group has a nominee and had also asked for a Vice  Presidency of the COP. He asked the Chair to provide the  Group with the rules on this situation.

The Chair said he will register the intention of WEOG and  the Asian Group for the different posts, but the  paragraph will say that the Asian Group and GRULAC did  not present a candidate at this stage and they are  requested to submit nominees by 18 April 1996. He said  the COP is still applying the rules and they are clear.  There are eleven members on the Bureau: a president, the  two Chairs of the subsidiary bodies, seven Vice  Presidents and one Rapporteur.

SAUDI ARABIA said that because the rules are only applied  nothing is binding and regional group suggestions are for  the whole plenary to decide. He recalled the African  Group's re-nomination of the SBI Chair and said the issue  is still open. The Chair said this was correct. The SBI  adopted the document.

The Executive-Secretary said the decision on the  organization of the Conference will make the  Secretariat's work easier. He then announced a new  document was being distributed that compiles the  conclusions of SBSTA and SBI (FCCC/SB/1996/L.1). One  element not included is the decision concerning money and  the budget. He reminded Parties that contributions to the  core budget were due 1 January and that funds were low in  the special voluntary fund for participation. The SBI  adjourned.

# A BRIEF ANALYSIS OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES MEETINGS

The main result of the second meetings of SBSTA and SBI  is that Parties to the Framework Convention on Climate  Change (FCCC) have documented that they cannot yet agree  on how to absorb or respond to scientific predictions of  climate change. Although initial discussions gave the  impression that SBSTA-2 would greet the IPCC's  predictions with less resistance than in previous FCCC  negotiations, oil producers and other developing  countries ultimately blocked consensus on specific  conclusions about the IPCC Second Assessment Report.  Weekend negotiations resulted in a fragile agreement on  language defining the divergence of opinion. Three  paragraphs in the SBSTA's report list points of  contention, alternately highlighting the urgency and  uncertainty in the IPCC report of a 'discernible human  influence' on climate change. One line of the SBSTA's  conclusions tells the story on Technical Advisory Panels:  at this stage SBSTA could not agree on modalities.

Some delegations urgently seeking action said the  consensus of disagreement was significant progress,  considering that several countries had in the past  opposed reference to any specific IPCC findings. To these  delegates the listing of the extent and severity of  potential climate change and impacts demonstrate two  things: that a sizable group of countries has taken the  IPCC report as an urgent basis for action; and that  despite insistence on including objections to the IPCC  highlights, the oil producers and others who have  resisted acknowledging human influence on global climate  either cannot or are no longer determined to completely  obstruct negotiations.

Few, however, took an optimistic view of the decision on  the TAPs. A mechanism through which the Climate Change  Convention is to evaluate policy and technology options  remains imprisoned by the process for selecting its  members. Struggling to develop at least a basis for  political solutions, delegates found no way to blend the  representation and concerns of Annex I, non-Annex I and  geographical groupings, and to set the TAPs to work. In  the end, a list of delegates were reduced to denying in  turn that they had blocked a decision. Asking for more  opinions on a roster of experts points the next round of  negotiations toward a mechanism for turning technical  information into decisions that are more vague than  SBSTA-2 began with.

The dispute over the TAPs' membership masks a more  substantive division of research priorities that is  rooted in the Convention's commitments and the Parties'  differentiated responsibilities. Non-Annex I Parties,  especially the small island States, are concerned about  adaptation measures as much or more than mitigation.  Annex I Parties currently obligated to emission  reductions want to focus Convention bodies first and  primarily on mitigation. If the TAPs were to advise  delegates on this work, the balance membership could edge  the Convention toward recommended actions or commitments  preferred by Annex I or non-Annex I Parties. This is one  possible implication. The broader problem remains to  identify an acceptable and effective means to apply a  political filter to scientific and technical information.

Two instructions for further scientific assessment gained  broad support during SBSTA-2. Led by developing  countries, delegates asked for regionally-oriented  analyses of climate change to specify predicted impacts  that, for the most part, have been estimated only at  broad, global scales. Interest in socioeconomic effects  continued to grow, with SBSTA tying socioeconomic  analysis to evaluation of specific proposals for new  commitments, including the AOSIS draft protocol.

The SBSTA requested additional scientific assessments  that change the basis, if not the consensus, of debate.  New or refined analyses will not dismiss the uncertainty  that provides the counterpoint to the IPCC's strongest  results (and drove some delegations to adamantly insert  the word 'failed' several times into the SBSTA's report).  If anything, additional projections of regional and  socioeconomic effects -- fields of science younger and  even less developed than global climate modeling -- will  place a new set of uncertainties before delegates.

These and other scientific efforts will introduce new  questions along with additional information, but it may  be the type of information that delegates are accustomed  to using in making political decisions. Even uncertain  localized impacts and economic projections could move  negotiators toward scientific ground that, while still  less than solid, is at least familiar. Governments make  decisions all the time based on economic projections. If  they are willing, they may be prepared to do so here. The  link between socioeconomic analysis and the specific  effects of proposals for new commitments could represent  the transformation of socioeconomic concerns from a point  of resistance by oil producing Parties to a means for  refining future action.

Other achievements of SBSTA-2 include progress on formats  for national communications by non-Annex I Parties and  reporting from the pilot phase of activities implemented  jointly (AIJ). The development of the G-77/China position  on non-Annex I communications was almost universally  greeted as the beginning of the implementation of non- Annex I commitments, although developed countries  questioned parts of the proposal. Sections drawing the  most scrutiny would grant developing countries  flexibility in the methodology and content of their  reports and exempt them from individual in-depth reviews  performed on Annex I communications. In addition to  outlining a reporting structure, developing countries  used the paper to point to the lack of resources provided  so far by Annex II countries to assist developing  countries' in meeting their commitments, a concern also  raised in the SBI. Developed country delegates were  critical of the potential consistency and transparency of  reports based on the G-77/China guidelines, but  developing countries pointed out, both in the SBSTA and  the SBI, that Annex I communications already suffered  from these qualities, particularly in reporting on  technology transfer.

The AIJ reporting guidelines advance the evaluation of  activities that a number of Annex I countries have  promoted as a cost-effective means to meet commitments.  Delegates agreed to a relatively specific reporting  system, collecting information at the project level and  including calculation of the contribution to emissions  reductions.

The SBSTA also took steps regarding participation by  NGOs, whose representatives were given limited access to  the floor during SBSTA meetings. After an initial  resistance by business NGOs, who say negotiating sessions  should be left to sovereign States, the SBSTA Bureau  permitted access to one person each from business,  environmental and local authorities' NGOs. A workshop on  NGO consultative mechanisms was not as immediately  successful. Although business NGOs presented principles  for a consultative mechanism, environmental groups found  themselves in the unusual position of blocking proposals  for new mechanisms, preferring instead to work through  existing channels.

The SBI shared several agenda items with SBSTA and heard  many similar debates. Like SBSTA, SBI delegates could  claim some measurable progress, yet comments on the floor  frequently highlighted what has not been done to  implement the Convention. While delegates welcomed the  GEF Council's adoption of its operational strategy, many  noted the need to expedite the process of providing 'full  agreed costs' for non-Annex I communications or risk  serious delays. Developing countries frequently noted  that providing funds to the GEF and providing funds to  countries were not the same thing. Developing countries  stressed that the information provided on technology  transfer activities of developed countries was lacking  and actual transfers were scarce. The SBI's review of in- depth reports revealed that many delegations found the  national communications in need of comparability and  consistency.

The problem of membership distribution provoked several  lengthy debates on the composition of the Bureau, a  question pending since COP-1. Despite numerous  consultations the issue remains outstanding.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR BEFORE COP-2

### CONFERENCES ON ACTIVITIES IMPLEMENTED JOINTLY (AIJ)

Regional Conference on Joint Implementation: Countries in  Transition. This Conference will be held from 17-19 April  1996 in the Hotel Ambassador, Vรกclavskรฉ, nรกm 5-7, 111 24  Prague, Czech Republic, and is sponsored by the UNEP  Regional Office for Europe, the governments of the  Netherlands and Norway. The Conference is organized under  the auspices of the Ministry of the Environment of the  Czech Republic. Further information is available from  SEVEn, Mr. Miloย Tichรฝ, P.O. Box 39, 120 56 Prague 2,  Czech Republic, tel: +42 2 2424 7552; fax: +42 2 2424  7597; email: seven@earn.cvut.cz. Information is also  available on the Internet at http://www.org.ji.

UNEP Conference on Activities Implemented Jointly under  the UNFCCC: Structuring Opportunities for Building  Consensus and Promoting International Cooperation. The  Conference is being organized by the UNEP and the World  Foundation for Environment and Development (WFED) and  will be held 20-24 May 1996 at the Herradura  International Conference Center, San Jose, Costa Rica.  For more information contact: UNEP Conference on AIJ, c/o  WFED, 1101 30th Street, NW-Suite 500, Washington, DC  20007 USA. Fax: +1-202-686-3771.

### IPCC WORKSHOPS

The IPCC will convene three workshops for  the further development of the Guidelines for National  GHG Inventories on the following topics: sources and  removal by sinks of greenhouse gases from land use and  forestry (Sao Josรฉ dos Campos, Sao Paulo, 21-22 March  1996); emissions from fuel combustion and industrial  processes (Abingdon, UK, 29-30 March 1996); and methane  emissions from rice cultivation (Bangkok, Thailand, 30  April -2 May 1996). The results will be incorporated as  additions and/or revisions to the guidelines, and  approved at IPCC-12, scheduled for the week of 9  September 1996 in Mexico. For more information contact:  IPCC Secretariat, WMO, 41 Av. Giuseppe-Motta, C.P. N   2300, 1211 Geneva 2 Switzerland, tel: +41 22 7308  215/254/284, fax: +41 22 7331 270, e-mail:  narasimhan.sundararaman@itu.ch.

### REGIONAL WORKSHOPS

A Workshop on Climate Change  Vulnerability and Adaptation in Latin America will take  place in Montevideo, Uruguay, from 22-24 April 1996. The  workshop is sponsored by the US Country Studies Program  (USCSP), the Comisiรณn Nacional sobre el Cambio Global and  the Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research  (invited). For more information contact: Annie Hareau or  Cecilia Ramos-Maรฑรฉ, Comisiรณn Nacional sobre el Cambio  Global, Cuidadela 1414, Piso 6, Montevideo 11100,  Uruguay, Tel/Fax: +598-2 932088 or Tel/Fax: +598-2  922416, e-mail: iaiuy@attmail.com; or Christopher B.  Bordeaux or Jack Fitzgerald, USCSP, 1000 Independence  Ave., SW, PO-63, Washington, DC 20585, USA, tel: +1-202  426-1637, fax: +1-202 426-1551, e-mail:  cbordeaux@igc.apc.org or jfitzgerald@igc.apc.org.

### THE SECOND MEETING OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES

COP- 2 will be held 8-19 July 1996 in Geneva. The session will  open in plenary the first day, then suspend the plenary  until Wednesday, 17 July, to allow for the sessions of  the four subsidiary bodies (AGBM, SBSTA, SBI and AG13) to  take place. The subsidiary bodies will provide inputs,  including draft decisions, for the various items on the  COP-2 agenda. The plenary will reconvene to conclude  negotiations and adopt decisions on 17-19 July.