---
title: "TWENTY-FOURTH SESSIONS OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES OF THE UN FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE AND ASSOCIATED MEETINGS: 15-26 MAY 2006"
id: enb12296e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12296e
date: 2006-05-26
abstract: "The twenty-fourth sessions of the Subsidiary Bodies (SB 24) of the  United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) are  taking place from 18-26 May 2006, at the Maritim Hotel in Bonn,  Germany. SB 24 will follow a UNFCCC 'Dialogue on long-term  cooperative action to address climate change by enhancing  implementation of the Convention,' being held from 15-16 May. In  addition, the first session of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further  Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol will take  place in parallel with SB 24, from 17-25 May. Both the UNFCCC  Dialogue and the Ad Hoc Working Group under the Kyoto Protocol are  being held as a result of decisions taken during the eleventh  Conference of the Parties (COP 11) to the UNFCCC and first  Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to  the Kyoto Protocol (COP/MOP 1) in Montreal in late 2005. At COP 11  and COP/MOP 1, delegates adopted a number of decisions to engage  in discussions for considering a framework for the post-2012  period (when the Kyoto Protocol's first commitment period ends)  and long-term cooperative action on climate change."
---

At SB 24, the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) will take  up such issues as national communications, financial and  administrative matters, capacity building, and amendment of the  Protocol in relation to the compliance mechanism. The Subsidiary  Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) will consider  a range of issues, including the five-year work programme on  adaptation, mitigation, technology transfer, reducing emissions  from deforestation in developing countries, and a range of  methodological issues under both the UNFCCC and the Kyoto  Protocol. Both SBI and SBSTA are expected to produce a number of  draft decisions to be forwarded to COP 12 and COP/MOP 2, which  will take place in November 2006 in Nairobi, Kenya.

In addition to the regular SB 24 sessions, the UNFCCC Dialogue and  the Ad Hoc Working Group, one other pre-sessional meeting and  three in-session workshops are scheduled. The Expert Meeting on  Economic Diversification is being held from 16-17 May, while  workshops are taking place on carbon capture and storage (20 May),  carbon capture as a Clean Development Mechanism activity (22 May),  and mitigation in relation to agriculture, forestry and rural  development (23 May). Furthermore, over 40 'side events' have been  scheduled on a range of climate change topics.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE UNFCCC AND THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

Climate change is considered to be one of the most serious threats  to sustainable development, with adverse impacts expected on the  environment, human health, food security, economic activity,  natural resources and physical infrastructure. Global climate  varies naturally, but scientists agree that rising concentrations  of anthropogenically-produced greenhouse gases in the Earth's  atmosphere are leading to changes in the climate. According to the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the effects of  climate change have already been observed, and scientific findings  indicate that precautionary and prompt action is necessary.

The international political response to climate change began with  the adoption of the UNFCCC in 1992. The UNFCCC sets out a  framework for action aimed at stabilizing atmospheric  concentrations of greenhouse gases to avoid 'dangerous  anthropogenic interference' with the climate system. Controlled  gases include methane, nitrous oxide and, in particular, carbon  dioxide. The UNFCCC entered into force on 21 March 1994, and now  has 189 parties. The parties to the UNFCCC typically convene  annually in a Conference of the Parties (COP), and twice a year in  meetings of the subsidiary bodies - the Subsidiary Body for  Implementation (SBI) and the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and  Technological Advice (SBSTA).

### THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

In December 1997, delegates at COP 3 in Kyoto,  Japan, agreed to a Protocol to the UNFCCC that commits developed  countries and countries making the transition to a market economy  to achieve emissions reduction targets. These countries, known  under the UNFCCC as Annex I Parties, agreed to reduce their  overall emissions of six greenhouse gases by an average of 5.2%  below 1990 levels between 2008-2012 (the first commitment period),  with specific targets varying from country to country. The  Protocol also establishes three flexible mechanisms to assist  Annex I Parties in meeting their national targets cost-effectively:  an emissions trading system; joint implementation (JI) of  emissions-reduction projects between Annex I Parties; and the Clean  Development Mechanism (CDM), which allows for emissions reduction  projects to be implemented in non-Annex I Parties (developing  countries). Following COP 3, parties began negotiating many of the  rules and operational details governing how countries will reduce  emissions and measure their emissions reductions. To date, 163  parties have ratified the Kyoto Protocol, including 37 Annex I  Parties representing 61.6% of 1990 Annex I greenhouse gas  emissions. The Kyoto Protocol entered into force on 16 February  2005.

### BUENOS AIRES PLAN OF ACTION

The process for finalizing the rules  and operational details of the Protocol was agreed at COP 4 in  1998 in a document known as the Buenos Aires Plan of Action. The  Plan set COP 6 as the deadline for finalizing these rules and  operational details and strengthening implementation of the  UNFCCC. In November 2000, parties met at COP 6 in The Hague, the  Netherlands, to complete these negotiations. They were not  successful and delegates suspended COP 6 until July 2001, when it  reconvened in Bonn, Germany. After further talks, delegates agreed  to adopt a political decision, the Bonn Agreements. While this  decision provided high-level political direction on the  implementation of the Kyoto Protocol, delegates were still unable  to finalize text on some issues, and agreed to forward all the  draft decisions to COP 7 for final resolution.

### MARRAKESH ACCORDS

In late October and early November 2001 at COP  7 in Marrakesh, Morocco, delegates resumed their discussions and  reached agreement on the Marrakesh Accords. These Accords  consisted of a package of draft decisions on many of the details  of the flexible mechanisms, reporting and methodologies, land use,  land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) and compliance with the  Kyoto Protocol, to be adopted by the first COP/MOP. The Accords  also address support for developing countries, including capacity  building, technology transfer, responding to the adverse effects  of climate change, and the establishment of three funds - the  Least Developed Countries (LDC) Fund, Special Climate Change Fund  (SCCF), and Adaptation Fund.

Delegates built on the Marrakesh Accords at COP 8 and COP 9,  agreeing on rules and procedures for the CDM Executive Board, and  on modalities and procedures for afforestation and reforestation  project activities under the CDM. Parties also discussed how to  integrate findings of the IPCC's Third Assessment Report into the  work of the UNFCCC, and agreed on two new agenda items focused on  adaptation and mitigation.

### COP 10

At COP 10 in Buenos Aires in December 2004, delegates  agreed on the Buenos Aires Programme of Work on Adaptation and  Response Measures. Parties also took decisions on technology  transfer, LULUCF, the UNFCCC's financial mechanism, and education,  training and public awareness. However, some issues remained  unresolved, including items on the LDC Fund, the SCCF, and  Protocol Article 2.3 (adverse effects of policies and measures).  Meanwhile, lengthy negotiations were held on the complex and  sensitive issue of how parties might engage on commitments to  combat climate change in the post-2012 period. The Kyoto Protocol  requires parties to begin considering the post-2012 period by  2005. Delegates agreed to hold a Seminar of Governmental Experts  prior to the 22nd sessions of the Subsidiary Bodies (SB 22) in May  2005, although the terms of reference for the Seminar did not  refer specifically to the post-2012 period or new commitments.

### SEMINAR OF GOVERNMENTAL EXPERTS AND SB 22

This seminar took place  in May 2005, in Bonn. Delegates started to address some of the  broader issues facing the climate change process, including a  future framework and commitments beyond 2012. Immediately  following the seminar, SB 22 convened, focusing on preparations  for COP 11 and COP/MOP 1, and addressing a variety of issues  ranging from budget matters to adaptation and mitigation.

### COP 11 AND COP/MOP 1

COP 11 and the first Conference of the  Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto  Protocol (COP/MOP 1) took place in Montreal, Canada, from 28  November to 10 December 2005. At COP/MOP 1, parties discussed and  adopted decisions on the outstanding operational details of the  Kyoto Protocol, including formally adopting the Marrakesh Accords.  COP/MOP 1 also took decisions on a process to discuss commitments  for the post-2012 period. Various methodological, administrative,  financial and institutional matters were also considered.

COP 11 addressed issues such as capacity building, technology  development and transfer, the adverse effects of climate change on  developing and least developed countries, and several financial  and budget-related issues, including guidelines to the Global  Environment Facility (GEF), which serves as the Convention's  financial mechanism. After lengthy negotiations, the COP also  agreed on a process to consider future action under the UNFCCC.

# INTERSESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS

### UNFCCC MEETINGS

Various UNFCCC events have been held since COP 11  and COP/MOP 1, including meetings of the CDM Executive Board (22- 23 February and 10-12 May, Bonn), Joint Implementation Supervisory  Committee (2-3 February and 8-11 March, Bonn), Compliance  Committee (1-3 March, Bonn) and Expert Group on Technology  Transfer (9-11 March, Brussels). In addition, there have been  workshops on the Adaptation Fund (3-5 May, Edmonton, Canada), the  five year adaptation work programme (13-15 March, Vienna), and a  number of other technical and regional meetings events, including  a regional workshop on adaptation for Latin America (18-20 April,  Lima).

### IPCC

As well as these UNFCCC gatherings, there have been a wide  range of other relevant meetings in recent months. These included  the twenty-fifth session of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate  Change (26-28 April 2006, Port Louis, Mauritius), which approved  the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories  and adoption of its Overview Chapter. Delegates also considered:  the IPCC programme and budget for 2007-09; further work on  emission scenarios; the future work programme of the Task Force on  National Greenhouse Gas Inventories; a Special Report on Renewable  Energy; a review of the IPCC's terms of reference; matters related  to the UNFCCC; and progress toward the Fourth Assessment Report.

### COMMISSION ON SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

During 2006 and 2007, the  UN Commission on Sustainable Development is focusing on four key  issues: energy for sustainable development, industrial development,  air pollution and the atmosphere, and climate change. At the  Commission's fourteenth session, held in New York from 1-12 May,  delegates launched a review of these issues, facilitated by expert  panels, discussions on regional implementation, a multistakeholder  dialogue and a high-level segment. Ministers engaged in dialogue  sessions with business leaders, heads of UN agencies and  international financial organizations, and Major Groups, focusing  on barriers and constraints and providing guidance on the priority  areas to be taken up at the CSD-15 policy session and at the  preceding Intergovernmental Preparatory Meeting in early 2007.

CSD-14 was dominated by the energy agenda, with discussions  focusing on energy security, the impact of oil and gas prices, and  the respective roles of renewable energy technologies and fossil  fuels, which, as delegates were informed repeatedly by oil- producing countries, will play a dominant role in the world's  energy mix for the foreseeable future. The non-negotiating format  of this 'review' session helped to disguise simmering tensions  over the future of fossil fuels, nuclear power and the climate  regime post-2012.

### OTHER MEETINGS

Other recent events include the first ministerial  meeting of the Asia-Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and  Climate (11-12 January, Sydney, Australia). The meeting of six  Asia-Pacific countries resulted in a communiqué that focuses on  energy challenges, fossil fuels, industry and technology  development. A variety of other regional meetings have also been  held since January 2006, and summaries can be found at  http://www.iisd.ca/recent/recentmeetings.asp?id=5.