---
title: "REPORT OF THE SIXTH SESSION OF THE AD HOC GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE: 3-7 MARCH 1997"
id: 1245000e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/1245000e
date: 1997-03-07
abstract: "The sixth session of the Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate  (AGBM-6) of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change  met from 3-7 March 1997 in Bonn, Germany. AGBM-6 focused its  deliberations on the Framework Compilation, which  incorporated the textual proposal from Parties as well as  other proposals for elements of a protocol or other legal  instrument. AGBM-6 also convened informal roundtables on new  proposals from Parties and differentiation, as well as 'non- groups' to exchange views and merge different proposals."
---

Delegates 'streamlined' the compilation text by merging or  eliminating some overlapping provisions within the myriad of  proposals contained in the Framework Compilation and brought  the process one step, albeit a small one, closer to  fulfilling its mandate. Much of the discussion centered on a  proposal from the EU for a 15% cut in a 'basket' of  greenhouse gases by the year 2010 compared to 1990 levels.  Nonetheless, other proposals emerged at in the eleventh  hour, signaling that AGBM-6, despite the hopes of many  observers, has yet to foster much progress on several  fundamental points. As one participant noted, this meeting  did not necessarily eliminate the number of proposals on the  table, it simply straightened and sorted them. Another  commented while discussing differentiation that indicators  can be read two ways and indeed indicators of progress at  AGBM-6 are equally equivocal. Whether these indicators  signal that the AGBM is making slow, solid progress or  slouching toward Kyoto seems a matter of one's expectations.

# OPENING PLENARY

On 3 March, AGBM Chair Raúl Estrada-Oyuela (Argentina) noted  the considerable number of new proposals and called for  long-term sustained efforts from industrialized countries.  He said changes would be neither easy nor inexpensive, but  added that the costs resulting from inaction far outweigh  the costs of preventative measures. He also welcomed Dan  Reifsnyder (US) as rapporteur.

FCCC Executive Secretary Michael Zammit-Cutajar noted that  AGBM-6 marks the last session prior to the six-month  deadline for circulating a draft protocol. The negotiating  text must 'contain the seeds' of the final outcome and there  should be no surprises after 1 June 1997.

The secretariat introduced the documentation for the  session: 'Framework Compilation of Proposals'  (FCCC/AGBM/1997/2 and Add. 1); 'Implementation of the Berlin  Mandate: proposal from Parties' (FCCC/AGBM/ 1997/Misc.1) and  'Comments from Parties' (FCCC/AGBM/ 1997/Misc.2). Regarding  the organization of work, the Chair urged delegates to  produce, elaborate on and streamline a negotiating text to  be ready by 1 June. He proposed establishing two 'non- groups'- a term coined by the Chair to describe informal  discussion groups with a mandate of 'streamlining' certain  parts of the text contained in the Framework Compilation.  One non-group was to focus on institutions and processes,  final elements, definitions and the preamble. The other non- group was to work on continuing to advance commitments in  Article 4.1. He said the main purpose of the non-groups is  to exchange views, rather than negotiate, and to merge  different proposals into one text in order to facilitate  adoption of a negotiating text.

The WORLD COUNCIL OF CHURCHES appealed to delegates to act  now and noted that delayed action will involve even higher  demands. He said climate change is an issue of global  justice and called on the AGBM to promote lifestyle changes  in developed countries. CHINA, IRAN and MOROCCO, on behalf  of the African Group, requested clarification on the  division of tasks between non-groups and asked whether the  non-groups would address policies and measures (P&Ms) and  quantified emissions limitation and reduction objectives  within specified time frames (QELROs). The G-77/CHINA,  supported by the EU, MALAYSIA and the AFRICAN GROUP, urged  that only a limited number of additional groups be  established, given the constraints facing small delegations.  CHINA also cautioned the AGBM not to 'waste time' on issues  related to institutions and definitions. The Chair responded  that P&Ms and QELROs would be addressed in Plenary and noted  the value of institutions and legal systems.

The EU urged countries to provide input in legal language  and streamline the Framework Compilation by focusing on  achievable options. The EU also suggested that the Chair  develop a protocol or other legal instrument by 1 June, if  the AGBM does not complete this work by the end of the week.  IRAN said the EU proposal was premature and SAUDI ARABIA  urged that the AGBM complete a negotiating text and not  leave work for the Chair. The Chair reminded delegates that  the non-groups would be open only to Parties and would not  involve negotiation.

Meetings were scheduled so that no more than two meetings  took place at any one time. The non-groups reported back to  Plenary, which adopted their reports as a basis for the  negotiating text at AGBM-7. The non-group on institutions,  mechanisms and any other clauses was chaired by Takao  Shibata (Japan). The non-group on elements related to  continuing to advance the implementation of existing  commitments in Article 4.1 was chaired Evans King (Trinidad  and Tobago).

# STRENGTHENING THE COMMITMENTS IN ARTICLE 4.2 (a) and (b)

## POLICIES AND MEASURES

On 5 March, the Chair opened the second meeting of AGBM-6 by  stating that this meeting is not intended for negotiating  but for refining and consolidating similar proposals  contained in the Framework Compilation of Proposals  (FCCC/AGBM/1997/2 and Add.1) to set out clear alternatives  for negotiation at AGBM-7.

Annex I Expert Group Chair Ian Pickard (UK) reported on  studies, carried out in cooperation with OECD and IEA, on  carbon and energy taxation, P&Ms to encourage innovation in  transport and technology and international greenhouse gas  emissions trading. Document FCCC/AGBM/1997/Misc.2 contains  an executive summary of these studies.

The Chair called on the AGBM to consider the submissions on  general commitments and guiding objectives for P&Ms. SAMOA  called for a coordination mechanism to assist Annex I  Parties in implementing their commitments, as proposed in  the protocol submitted by the Alliance of Small Island  States (AOSIS). The mechanism would provide advice on a full  range of measures including taxes and subsidies and would  report regularly to the 'Meeting of the Parties.' The  mechanism would be multi-disciplinary and open to  participation by all Parties, government representatives,  NGOs and scientists with relevant expertise. SAMOA also  noted the need to avoid duplication of tasks, but expressed  concern that existing subsidiary bodies may not be  appropriately equipped to address technical issues.

SAUDI ARABIA and CHINA said the comments from Parties  contained in document FCCC/AGBM/1997/2/Add.1 should be  included in the Framework Compilation. CHINA also expressed  confusion regarding references to Annexes X, A and B in the  proposals and urged Parties to refrain from developing new  categories. JAPAN suggested that Annex I Parties adopt P&Ms  according to national circumstances, in the areas of  efficient use of energy, low-carbon energy, technological  development and cooperation, and enhancement of sinks. The  'Meeting of the Parties' shall decide on indicators for  P&Ms.

The EU, supported by SWITZERLAND, favored legally-binding  P&Ms and highlighted its proposed Annex A (common P&Ms),  Annex B (coordinated P&Ms that receive high priority) and  Annex C (priority P&Ms for inclusion in national  programmes). The EU proposal contains P&Ms on: renewable  energies; energy efficiency standards; labelling and other  product-related measures; transport sector; economic  instruments; energy policies; industry sector emissions;  agriculture sector; forestry; and fluorocarbons. Several  delegations commented on the EU proposal and some noted  alternative approaches and priorities. POLAND and the  RUSSIAN FEDERATION supported a menu approach, which takes  account of various economic structures and attempts to  maintain a high and stable rate of economic growth. The G-77/CHINA, supported by SAUDI ARABIA, stressed that P&Ms  should not have adverse impacts on developing country  Parties. He also expressed concern about new annexes that  would impose new commitments on non-Annex I Parties. The EU  reiterated that its proposal provides flexibility through  Annex B, which lists P&Ms to be applied according to  national circumstances.

The US and SAUDI ARABIA did not support inclusion of  specific P&Ms. The US also noted that sound information is  not available for controlling greenhouse gases not listed in  the proposed Annex C and suggested elaborating on P&Ms under  the section on reporting. SAUDI ARABIA also warned that P&Ms  undertaken by Annex I countries could negatively affect  trade with developing countries. IRAN stressed the need for  a section on general commitments and guiding measures in the  protocol.

The EU clarified that energy efficiency, standards and  labelling, as well as P&Ms related to fluorocarbons, should  be the highest priority. He also noted that paragraphs  proposed by a number of Parties, including Norway, Iceland,  New Zealand and Switzerland, could be integrated into the EU  proposal. He said some developed countries, particularly the  US, have not included binding measures in their proposals  and emphasized the EU's conviction that P&Ms should be  included to fully encompass the Berlin Mandate and the  Geneva Declaration.

CHINA reiterated that the Berlin Mandate requires an  elaboration of P&Ms whose objectives should be clear at this  stage. He said the EU proposal is too complicated and  supported a proposal by the Chair to use three 'groups'  rather than annexes on objectives, common but coordinated  P&Ms and national P&Ms. The US also cautioned against  including too many details and cited a number of examples  illustrating the difficulties of proposed P&Ms related to  specific products.

The EU did not support the groupings proposed by the Chair  and noted they were difficult to distinguish. He said  objectives should not be separated from mechanisms and  measures, and proposed listing all of them in Annex A. He  also said that relevant details related to specific products  must be considered because they are traded in the  international market and an international agreement is  needed to ensure results.

The EU also reported that the EU Council had reached a  common position on QELROs. The EU proposed that Parties to  the Berlin Mandate will reduce emission levels for carbon  dioxide (C02), methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) by 15%  by 2010 with a reference year of 1990. The EU also proposed  an interim target for 2005.

The Chair also requested delegates to consider a proposal  regarding countries with economies in transition who are  requesting a specific annex because of their particular  circumstances. The EU did not support a separate annex and  noted that the concerns of these countries could be  addressed elsewhere, such as in an introductory section. The  Chair, supported by IRAN, said these concerns are better  addressed when considering QELROs.

On 6 March, the Chair presented his draft conclusions on  P&Ms, which represent a streamlined version of Section II of  the Framework Compilation on strengthening the commitments  in Article 4.2 (a) and (b). The draft conclusions contain  four elements: proposals regarding policies and measures;  general proposals; proposals relevant to the nature and mix  of policies and measures; and lists of policies and  measures.

'Proposals regarding policies and measures,' address:  adoption of coordinated P&Ms; preparation of National Action  Plans; national and regional programmes for climate change  mitigation and protection; and enhancement of sinks and  reservoirs. Some of the proposals refer to P&Ms with  different priority levels, while others cite specific items  such as removal of coal subsidies, technology development  and transfer and promotion of renewable energy sources.

The 'General proposals' support: identification of  environmental and socio-economic impacts of P&Ms;  compatibility between P&Ms and national development  programmes; and cost-effective P&Ms. Some entries in  'Proposals relevant to the nature and mix of policies and  measures,' call for individual, rather than coordinated,  fulfillment of commitments and protection for developing  countries, especially oil producing States. The section on  'Lists of policies and measures' begins with a proposal from  the Chair that contains three lists regarding: policy  objectives for all Annex I Parties; possible mechanisms for  implementation of P&Ms and a menu of P&Ms from which Parties  could choose according to their national circumstances. The  Chair's proposal is followed by entries from several Parties  including Canada, the EU, Switzerland and Japan. Each entry  contains specific P&Ms.

The Chair said some Parties have submitted 'negative'  proposals, which note that they object to the inclusion of  specific issues. He proposed including a general chapeau  noting their objections and said that all ideas retained in  the negotiating text do not have to be included in the  Protocol. The proposal also contains several symbols and  letters and the Chair said values would be attributed to  them in future sessions. IRAN inquired about the possibility  of elaborating on each proposal. The Chair noted that other  proposals could be submitted later and asked delegates to  refrain from making substantive statements.

POLAND requested that each reference to a new Annex specify  which Parties will be included. NEW ZEALAND deleted its  proposal calling for compulsory phasing out of fossil fuel  subsidies. The G-77/CHINA noted its intention to submit a  proposal on P&Ms. The EU requested that certain items from  its proposed list of P&Ms also be noted in the Chair's  proposed list of P&Ms. The EU said it would submit 'List C,'  containing P&Ms to be given priority by Parties listed in  Annex X, as appropriate to national circumstances. The  RUSSIAN FEDERATION requested retaining its proposals. One  states that a protocol or other legal instrument should not  change or replace statements of the Convention, including  its principles. The other states that Parties to the  protocol are guided by principles of the Convention.

Delegates also commented on the Framework Compilation  (FCCC/AGBM/1997/2 and Add.1). The EU deleted several  paragraphs submitted by its member States because these  submissions were superseded by the common EU proposal. The  Chair noted that a section on education, training and public  awareness, included in the addendum, would also be included  in the negotiating text.

## QUANTIFIED EMISSIONS LIMITATION AND REDUCTION OBJECTIVES

Prior to consideration of QELROs, delegates heard statements  from non-governmental organizations (NGOs). CLIMATE ACTION  NETWORK, on behalf of environmental NGOs, asked delegates if  they had the political will and moral character to act in  the best interest of all the citizens of the world. She also  called for a 20% reduction in carbon dioxide emissions by  2005. The US and EUROPEAN BUSINESS COUNCILS FOR SUSTAINABLE  ENERGY proposed as priorities: setting clear near-term  targets and time frames; using market-based tools to account  for 'external costs' of energy, which would allow each Party  to select suitable options; and reducing and eliminating  institutional barriers, such as subsidies and tax  exemptions.

The INTERNATIONAL PETROLEUM INDUSTRY ENVIRONMENTAL  CONSERVATION ASSOCIATION, on behalf of European industries,  noted that the years 2005 and 2010 are impracticably close  deadlines. He said developing countries are expected to  generate two-thirds of global greenhouse gas emissions by  2025 and urged delegates to secure worldwide agreement. The  AMERICAN FEDERATION OF LABOR-CONGRESS OF INDUSTRIAL  ORGANIZATIONS, on behalf of labor groups, expressed concern  that 'harsh, arbitrary' flat-rate reductions in greenhouse  gas emissions are being proposed without regard to their  impact on working people. He urged delegates to remember  that they hold the power to destroy jobs and incomes of  millions.

Following these statements, delegates discussed aspects of  the proposals on QELROs contained in the Framework  Compilation (FCCC/AGBM/1997/2 and Add.1).

On 'guiding objectives,' the EU stated that eventual  reduction of C02 emissions to 50% of their current levels is  required to keep global average temperature from increasing  more than two degrees above its pre-industrial level. He  recalled the recent decision of the EU Council of  Environment Ministers, which established a common position  on a reduction target for the year 2010. The EU's proposal  states that, in the longer term, more sophisticated methods  to allocate reduction targets shall be implemented and will  eventually lead to a convergence of emission levels based on  appropriate indicators. The EU could not accept Iran's  proposed condition that QELROs for Annex I Parties must not  affect international trade or national incomes of developing  countries, particularly those exporting fossil fuels.

The EU also suggested that the US proposal regarding  establishment of long-term goals could be incorporated into  the new EU submission. The US responded that this change  should await a written submission from the EU.

On 'legal character' of QELROs, the EU reiterated its  support for QELROs for significant overall reductions and  noted that P&Ms should also be legally-binding. SWITZERLAND  stressed that each Annex I Party should adopt legally- binding QELROs. NIGERIA requested the deletion of a  reference to the Geneva Ministerial Declaration, which calls  for legally-binding QELROs for Annex I Parties within  specified time frames with respect to sources and removal of  sinks of greenhouse gases not controlled by the Montreal  Protocol. He emphasized that the Declaration was not adopted  and noted that the G-77/CHINA proposal to set 'realistic and  achievable QELROs in a comprehensive manner' reflects its  substance. PERU referred to the Geneva Declaration and  called for reduction target for the year 2005.

On 'coverage,' the EU proposed covering carbon dioxide  (C02), methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O), and to add  hydrofluorocarbon (HFC), perfluorocarbon (PFC) and  sulphurhexafluoride (SF6) to the 'basket' of gases by 2000.  P&Ms to reduce emissions of these gases should be included  in the protocol. The US proposed merging paragraphs on Annex  I commitments based on the C02 equivalents of their emission  contributions to the atmospheric stock of greenhouse gases  and on the exception of sources and sinks for which there is  insufficient knowledge of the global warming potential (GWP)  or inability to accurately measure emissions or removals.  HUNGARY supported the US's long-term goal for reduction of  atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations.

NORWAY and ICELAND withdrew their proposals, as they were  contained in other proposals. SAUDI ARABIA insisted on  references to sinks and greenhouse gases other than C02.  CHINA said that the text should only include issues on which  agreement has been reached. JAPAN did not agree and called  for retention of its proposal that QELROs would be set for  C02 only. The MARSHALL ISLANDS, on behalf of AOSIS, stressed  the need for hard targets for C02 reductions.

On 'level and timing/emissions budgets,' the EU urged early  stabilization of greenhouse gases. He noted that sections of  the EU proposal in the Framework Compilation should be  replaced with the new EU common position. The position  states that Annex X Parties, individually or jointly, in  accordance with the Berlin Mandate, shall reduce emission  levels for C02, CH4 and N2O together (weighted total, using  GWP, with a 100-year time horizon) by 15% by 2010 with a  reference year of 1990. An interim target for 2005 will also  be set. The EU opposed the concept of borrowing and the  consideration of emissions budgets without QELROs and  timetables. He favored flexibility regarding the base year  for countries with economies in transition.

The G-77/CHINA called for: flexibility for Annex I countries  due to their differences in starting points; no adverse  effects of P&Ms on developing countries; and no further  commitments for developing countries. CHINA called for all  other Annex I countries to propose QELROs with time frames  as the EU has done. He opposed emissions borrowing and, with  HUNGARY, opposed a new category for countries that are  rapidly developing. The RUSSIAN FEDERATION highlighted his  proposal that new commitments of Parties do not cancel,  reconsider or prolong commitments adopted by Annex I Parties  for the period before the year 2000. He supported 2010 as a  target and said that 2005 as an intermediate target seems  unrealistic. The MARSHALL ISLANDS called for separate and  short-term targets for reducing the level for C02 emissions.  The US stressed that the Berlin Mandate does not preclude  emissions budgets. He noted that the EU proposal does not  specify whether countries should abide by QELROs  individually or jointly. He also suggested that the EU  proposal include Table 1 of the decision by the EU Council  of Environment Ministers. This table specifies emission  reduction targets for each EU country. The EU responded that  the Council decision is not part of the EU proposal for the  protocol.

On 4 March, Chair Chow Kok Kee (MALAYSIA) reported on the  roundtable on differentiation. He noted a growing consensus  that indicators will be useful in negotiating QELROs. He  also acknowledged divergent views on whether or not the EU  Council of Environment Ministers' decision illustrates a  differentiation practice applicable outside the EU.

The EU requested more time to determine whether proposals  from individual EU countries could be deleted and  incorporated into the EU's new proposals. NORWAY noted that  ambitious targets via legally-binding commitments can only  be achieved through efforts such as differentiation,  equitable burden sharing, comprehensive treatment of sources  and sinks, and coordination of economic instruments. He also  noted that the EU decision illustrates how differentiation  facilitates more ambitious targets. He stated that a 10 to  15% reduction for Annex I countries by the year 2010 would  be both ambitious and realistic. The US restated that a  differentiated approach would not be appropriate. AUSTRALIA  insisted that its complete text on differentiation be  reproduced in the document.

On the issue of 'flexibility,' MALAYSIA, supported by CHINA,  requested deletion of the entire section. He said that the  issue was already covered under differentiation and QELROs.  The EU noted the high improbability of reaching agreement on  a trading system in time for COP-3. He cited disagreement on  the use of procedures for monitoring and verification and  the use trading as a substitute or delaying mechanism for  domestic action.

On 'Joint Implementation' (JI), the G-77/CHINA called for  the deletion of the entire section. UZBEKISTAN called for  the retention of text noting that JI can serve as an  instrument to allow technology transfer on a more beneficial  basis. The EU said that Germany's proposal that 'a certain  portion yet to be determined may be met through JI, whereby  a significant part of the commitments must be met through  measures within each Party's own territory' should be  retained for now. SWITZERLAND supported retaining its  proposal that: JI may contribute up to 50% to meeting a  country's fulfillment of commitments; JI may begin in 2000;  and JI can also take place with non-Parties to the Protocol.  PERU requested retaining JI in the text, until the review at  year's end.

Delegates also discussed impacts that new Annex I  commitments may have on developing countries. SAUDI ARABIA  and NIGERIA requested retaining paragraphs relating to loss  of income. The EU did not support a compensation mechanism  for financial losses of oil producing countries.

Proposals in the Framework Compilation related to  measurement, reporting and communication of information and  voluntary application of commitments by non-Annex I Parties  were accepted without amendment.

On 7 March, the Chair introduced 'Draft text by the  chairman, strengthening the commitments in Article 4.2(a)  and (b): quantified emission limitation and reduction  objectives within specified time frames (QELROs).' This  document includes six sections: introductory elements by the  Chair; atmospheric concentration; level and timing;  flexibility; possible impacts on developing countries of new  commitments in the new instrument/socio-economic injuries  sustained by developing countries; and measurement,  reporting and communication of information. The section on  level and timing includes: proposals for specific flat-rate  targets and timetables for C02 and other greenhouse gases;  support for such targets and timetables without reference to  specific numbers; differentiation via various indicators;  provisions for regional economic integration organizations;  emissions budgets; emissions based on a cumulative emissions  basis; and joint implementation.

NEW ZEALAND requested that its proposal on sinks contained  in Addendum 1 to the Framework Compilation be included in  the additional proposal section on 'level and timing.' The  draft text was accepted for inclusion in the negotiating  text.

## CONTINUING TO ADVANCE IMPLEMENTATION OF EXISTING COMMITMENTS  IN ARTICLE 4.1

On 6 March, Chair Evans King (Trinidad and Tobago) presented  a report from the non-group on 'Continuing to advance the  implementation of existing commitments in Article 4.1.' He  said that the non-group held two meetings on 4 and 5 March  in which a collegial atmosphere facilitated frank dialogue.  Discussions led to a streamlined text with narrative  sections and allowed proposal authors to see how other  countries viewed their proposals.

The report contains a streamlined text of the section in the  Framework Compilation on continuing to advance the  implementation of existing commitments in Article 4.1. It  consists of proposals requesting all Parties, inter alia, to  implement programmes containing measures to address  emissions by sources and removals by sinks of all gases. It  states that the process will reaffirm and continue to  advance implementation of commitments in Article 4.1. and  will not introduce any new commitments for non-Annex I  Parties.

Non-Annex I Parties' implementation of Article 4.1 is  contingent upon developed country Parties fulfilling  commitments related to financial resources and technology  transfer for: systematic observation and research;  assessment at the national level of economic and social  impacts of climate change and of various response  strategies; national education and training programmes;  integrated plans for management of coastal zones, water  resources, agriculture, conservation and enhancement of  sinks; data for initial national communications; and  formulation, implementation, publication and updating of  programmes containing measures addressing climate change.  The necessary resources for the implementation of these  activities are to be provided by the operating entity of the  financial mechanism.

The report also contains proposals requesting all Parties  to: regularly update national programmes that include P&Ms  for increasing energy efficiency and improving the transport  sector and industrial process efficiency; provide annual  greenhouse gas inventory data on the basis of IPCC  compatible methodologies; and make available to the COP  strategies for mitigating climate change and national  inventories of technology needs.

Proposals included in the report would also require Parties  to foster bilateral, regional and global cooperation for:  development of national inventories and indicators;  development, application and diffusion of technologies;  voluntary participation in AIJ; participation in the work of  international bodies and programmes on climate change  mitigation and adaptation; strengthening of legal and  institutional frameworks; investment in climate-friendly  technologies; and reporting on public education and  participation.

Proposals would also require that in-depth reviews of Annex  I Parties' communications include a formal opportunity for  other Parties to ask questions. Parties proposed that non- Annex A or Annex B Parties would submit to the secretariat:  annual inventories of greenhouse gas emissions; measures  implemented; and quantified effects of actual and potential  measures. Proposals would also require that all Parties  establish a process for reviewing communications.

## INSTITUTIONS, MECHANISMS & OTHER CLAUSES

Mr. Takao Shibata (Japan) chaired the non-group on elements  related to institutions, mechanisms and other clauses, which  met from 4-5 March. On 7 March, Mr. Shibata presented the  report of the non-group. He explained that this document is  based on sections of the Framework Compilation dealing with  preamble and definitions, institutions and processes, and  final elements. Section I on introductory elements concerns  preamble and definitions. Section II addresses the following  institutions and processes attendant to the protocol:  conference of the Parties/meeting of the Parties;  secretariat; subsidiary bodies; coordination mechanism;  financial mechanism; review of information and review of  implementation and compliance; a multilateral consultative  process; and dispute settlement. Section III on final  elements contains several parts including decision making,  amendments, relationship with the Convention, adoption and  amendment of annexes, right to vote, relationship to other  agreements, signature, ratification and entry into force.

He reported that, in adhering to its 'non-mandate' to  streamline proposals, the non-group produced a document that  he was confident the AGBM would approve. Although the non- group did not complete its work on 'final elements,' the  group entrusted Mr. Shibata and the secretariat to finish  work on this section.

# ROUNDTABLES

## ROUNDTABLE ON NEW PROPOSALS FROM PARTIES

This roundtable was convened on 3 March to give delegates  who had not presented their submissions to the Framework  Compilation the opportunity to elaborate on their proposals  and respond to questions. AGBM Vice-Chair Suphavit  Piamphongsant (Thailand) opened the roundtable and noted  that 18 new proposals had been submitted.

The proposal by POLAND, BULGARIA, ESTONIA, LATVIA and  SLOVENIA stated that QELROs should be legally-binding.  Proposed criteria for QELROs include: GDP per capita; each  Party's contribution to global emissions; and emissions per  capita and/or emissions intensity of GDP. They also  preferred the 'menu approach' for establishing measures to  be adopted by Parties.

The EU proposal includes a general commitment for Parties  listed in 'Annex X,' which would consist of OECD members and  countries with economies in transition. It groups P&Ms into  Annex A (mandatory), Annex B (high priority) and Annex C  (priority). The proposal allows for joint implementation and  voluntary application by non-Annex X Parties.

The G-77/CHINA urged the AGBM to adhere to the Convention  and the Berlin Mandate and refrain from developing new  commitments for non-Annex I Parties. The G-77/CHINA proposal  calls for: ensuring that P&Ms have no adverse socio-economic  impacts on developing countries; establishing a concrete  compensation mechanism for damage in developing countries  arising from implementation of response measures; and  setting QELROs within specified time frames, such as 2005,  2010 and 2020.

FRANCE proposed differentiating the commitments of Annex I  Parties according to present emission levels of greenhouse  gases per inhabitant and per GDP. He proposed coordinating  P&Ms at an international level and considering joint  measures between Annex I and non-Annex I Parties. ICELAND  proposed differentiation and the following parameters for  identifying differences in national circumstances:  greenhouse gas (GHG) emission intensity and level, share of  renewable energy sources and GDP per capita. He supported  the formula Norway presented at AGBM-5, amended to account  for the share of renewable energy. MALAYSIA commented that  parameters are changing regularly. MAURITIUS inquired about  a supervisory mechanism for this formula.  VENEZUELA,  supported by COSTA RICA, suggested 'historical  responsibility' as an additional criterion for  differentiation. SWITZERLAND added 'past efforts' by  countries to reduce greenhouse gas emissions as another  criterion.

IRAN's proposal opposes C02 taxes, energy taxes and new  commitments for non-Annex I countries. His suggestions for  reducing GHG emissions include: a focus on all GHGs; market- determined energy prices; removal of subsidies on coal and  polluting energy sources; development of renewable energy  sources; enhancement of sinks; and attention to production  and consumption sector activities and industrial processes.  IRAN also proposed a compensation mechanism for adverse  impacts of response measures. Responding to ZIMBABWE, IRAN  noted that its proposed compensation mechanism is designed  to compensate countries that incur losses due to polices and  measures stipulated by the AGBM legal instrument and does  not provide funds for countries that incur damages resulting  directly from climate change. The US suggested that the  proposal requires the AGBM to project the consequences of  non-action and asked what methodology would be used to make  such a projection. IRAN replied that further details would  be supplied at a later date.

AUSTRALIA proposed: a collective reduction objective for  'Annex A' Parties, which are those listed in Annex I of the  FCCC; mitigation activities that result in equal percentage  changes in per capita economic welfare among 'Annex A'  Parties; differentiated commitments; use of indicators in  the negotiation process; and further consideration of  market-based approaches such as emissions trading and joint  implementation. The proposal also supports a regular review  process that Parties may activate with regard to their own  commitments. Responding to MALAYSIA, AUSTRALIA said formula  approaches are too simplistic to account for wide variations  among countries' circumstances and emphasized that  differentiation is not a means to delay action, but to  achieve fairness. AOSIS asked why supporters of  differentiation had not pooled their proposals and requested  information on how differentiation would work in practice.  CHINA expressed concern that emissions trading would replace  government commitments with activities of firms and  individuals.

KUWAIT, NIGERIA and SAUDI ARABIA supported the proposal by  the G-77/CHINA. They expressed concern about economic and  social consequences of developed country Parties' policies  and measures and requested adequate compensation for  developing countries. They recalled Article 4.8(h), which  refers to countries whose economies are highly dependent on  income generated from fossil fuels, and Article 4.10, which  states that Parties shall take into consideration the  specific needs and concerns of fossil fuel producing  countries and adverse effects resulting from the  implementation of commitments. They noted that developed  country Parties should take the lead in combating climate  change.

The US asked whether: developed countries that export fossil  fuel or suffer from increased oil prices are eligible for  compensation; developers of solar power are liable for  injury; and  developed countries that take action to prevent  damage in developing countries are also liable under this  proposal. SAUDI ARABIA reiterated that developed country  Parties should bear more of the burden and accommodate such  effects through measures like differentiation. ITALY pointed  out that the Convention does not include a compensation  mechanism. SAUDI ARABIA, supported by IRAN, noted Article  4.8, stating that funding action be considered in regard to  the specific needs of developing countries. KUWAIT noted his  disappointment that the developed countries' proposals do  not mention any provision for developing countries'  compensation.

CANADA noted that economic change resulting from changes in  energy sources has occurred over the past century and will  continue regardless of a protocol. SAUDI ARABIA emphasized  that it is the right of every Party to try to minimize the  adverse impacts of an international legally-binding  agreement according to provisions given in the Convention.  NEW ZEALAND emphasized the importance of flexibility with  respect to time (multi-year average emissions limitations);  place (emissions trading); and coverage (all GHGs and  sinks).

The US proposal contains: emissions budgets (banking and  borrowing emissions); and annual reports on measurement,  reporting and compliance by 'Annex A' and 'Annex B'  countries. Annex B would contain countries that have  voluntarily entered before protocol adoption. Other elements  of the US proposal are: non-compliance measures (e.g. denial  of opportunity to engage in emissions trading or loss of  voting rights); continuing to advance implementation of  Article 4.1, particularly 'no regrets' measures; and  emissions trading between Parties with budgets, and joint  implementation between all Parties. Several countries noted  the complexity of the US proposal. In response to the EU,  the US highlighted the ability of countries to determine  their own budgets and the penalty for emissions borrowing.  THAILAND suggested that the AGBM not spend time discussing  emissions trading.

UZBEKISTAN proposed differentiation for Annex I Parties,  according to the level of economic development and GDP per  capita. He called for flexibility regarding obligations of  countries with economies in transition, and developed  country support for non-Annex I country activities.

## ROUNDTABLE ON DIFFERENTIATION

This roundtable was convened following a request by AGBM-5   to allow delegates to informally exchange views on  differentiation. Chair Chow Kok Kee (Malaysia) welcomed the  speakers on differentiation and called for a non- confrontational process that promotes understanding rather  than political positions. Mr. Harald Dovland (Norway) said  that differentiation provides for a more equitable and  ambitious goal than the lowest common denominator agreement  allowed by a flat-rate approach. He highlighted single and  multiple criteria approaches to differentiation and  emphasized that differentiation formulas are not necessarily  meant to determine binding targets, but to provide tools for  guiding negotiations.

He cited the EU's proposed goals as an ambitious example for  differentiation and cautioned that flexible instruments,  such as joint implementation, are not a replacement for  differentiation.

The US did not support the suggestion that progress can be  achieved through differentiation and said that under a flat  rate countries could accomplish more. He questioned the  'trade-off' between differentiation and a flat rate and  asked if a system of differentiation is necessary. The Chair  then introduced other panelists, who spoke in their  individual capacity.

Mr. Akihiko Furuya (Japan) said that differentiation is  indispensable for achieving fairness and noted that the  Berlin Mandate calls for taking into account the different  starting points of countries. He discussed a 'formula-based  approach,' under which QELROs can be divided according to  specific indicators. He also noted the 'selective approach,'  under which countries could use GDP as an indicator, and the  'negotiation approach,' under which each country would  negotiate its QELROs with other countries.

Mr. Maciej Sadowski (Poland) said that the preferred  approach involves differentiation by countries and noted  that aggregation into groups could be effective. He  underscored the political difficulties in agreeing on a  common set of criteria and proposed concentrating on the  target to be achieved by each Party.

Amb. Louet (France) noted that differentiation is not a  result of theoretical considerations, but of unavoidable  practical necessity. He noted that the EU has adopted a  common position and explained that a greenhouse gas  emissions reduction of 30% for Luxembourg and 25% for  Germany, could be offset by Portugal's and Greece's  respective greenhouse gas emissions increase of 30% and 40%,  which account for differences in starting points. He noted  that even countries favoring the flat-rate concept recognize  the need for flexibility. He cautioned that a tradable  permit system would give premium to the biggest producer of  greenhouse gases.

The EU underlined the differences in countries' ability and  costs associated with meeting commitments. As a regional  group, it is taking on joint commitments and will engage in  internal burdensharing. A number of EU countries are willing  to commit themselves to reduce emissions. SWITZERLAND  stressed that there is no good unique indicator that can  take into account national circumstances and said that the  logical starting point of the discussion is agreement on the  quantity to differentiate.

The US suggested focusing on targets, outcomes and QELROs so  that overall reductions can take place while Parties who  find targets burdensome can trade emissions with others.  GERMANY urged countries to enrich progress by making  concrete proposals regarding numbers for significant overall  reductions and the contributions that countries intend to  make toward these goals.

Amb. Howard Bamsey (Australia) stressed that differentiation  is necessary for reflecting different national  circumstances. He noted there are a large number of  proposals, but a small number of indicators. He outlined  common groups among proposed indicators: those based on  economic structures and resource bases; those based on  emission reduction tasks including population growth,  economic growth and per capita resources; and others based  on trade impacts.

GERMANY stated that differentiation within the EU was not  based on indicators, because indicators do not reflect  political reality. She noted that Germany, Denmark and  Austria accepted the largest shares of the reduction burden  because they are convinced that combating climate change is  important. The US noted that the EU collectively argued in  1990 that they would reduce emissions drastically. He said  this reduction would have been possible with a flat-rate.

GERMANY, referring to the EU experience, suggested making a  joint commitment for a future protocol, setting common  targets for Annex I Parties and deciding how to share them.  AUSTRALIA asked how differentiation was achieved within the  EU and noted this could set an example for Annex I countries  on the road to Kyoto. ICELAND stressed the need to reach  conclusions on differentiation before Kyoto.

# CLOSING PLENARY

AGBM Chair Raúl Estrada-Oyuela opened the final meeting of  AGBM-6 by instructing delegates to focus attention on the  three draft texts that reflect efforts to streamline the  Framework Compilation and its Addendum: the report of the  non-group on elements related to institutions, mechanisms  and other clauses; the Chair's draft text on QELROs; and the  Chair's draft text on elements related to objective,  principles, review of commitments, education, training and  public awareness, evolution and annexes.

The Chair introduced his draft text on 'Elements related to  objective, principles, review of commitments, education,  training and public awareness, evolution and annexes.'  Section I of the document addresses objective and  principles. The four proposals on objective reflect a range  of views: while one proposal calls for QELROs, another  simply refers to Article 2 of the Convention and paragraph 2  of the Berlin Mandate.

Proposals in the section on principles note difficulties of  countries dependent on fossil fuel production, coordination  between climate change responses and socio-economic  development, and transfer of technology.

Proposals in Section II, Review of Commitments, address  timing, criteria, mechanisms and the scope of reviews, as  well as a Party's ability to activate the review process  with regard to its own commitments. Section III, Education,  Training and Public Awareness, refers to Article 6 of the  Convention. Section IV, Evolution, addresses conditions  under which future commitments should develop. Section V,  Annexes, contains proposals concerning listing of Parties,  QELROs and methodological issues. Delegates agreed the draft  text will be included in the negotiating text.

Regarding the organization of future work, he informed the  AGBM of an extension of the deadline for new proposals to 1  April 1997. The negotiating text will be available in the  six official UN languages by 1 June. It will replace  narrative sections of the text with legal language. CHINA  stressed that the AGBM has not started negotiating yet and  requested retention of the title 'draft text by the  Chairman' for the new document.  The Chair did not accept  this request and refused to hear any further comments on  this matter. CHINA, supported by HUNGARY, also requested  that any text submitted after the deadline should be  included in the addendum of the new text. The CENTRAL  AFRICAN REPUBLIC supported China's proposal and called for  an addendum for new proposals rather than integration into  the Chair's draft text. The EU also called for clarification  on this matter. The Chair responded that late submissions  will be published in full in Miscellaneous documents. The  Chair said that any new proposals should be structured like  the framework compilation and should be clearly derived from  proposals already on the table. The Chair noted that the  next session, scheduled from 28 July to 7 August 1997 in  Bonn, will be more difficult as Parties will have to engage  in negotiations. He announced that there will be two teams  of interpreters to allow two meetings to convene in parallel  and repeated that the session will start on Thursday 31  July, rather than Friday, 1 August. He requested Parties to  review the negotiating text before the next session and  emphasized that Annex I Parties must review QELROs and  policies and measures, stressing that without agreement  among themselves negotiations will be blocked. He recalled  that Annex I Parties should take the lead, show the will to  advance the process, and fill in the 'blanks' long before  Kyoto. Participants also decided to request the rapporteur,  with the support of the secretariat, to prepare the report  of the session. The Chair said that the negotiating text  will be added to the report as an addendum.

The G-77/CHINA stressed that all proposals outside the  Berlin Mandate should be 'off the table' at AGBM-7. He also  stated that there should be agreement on QELROs before  issues of implementation are further discussed. He  reiterated that articles of the Convention should apply to  the protocol or other legal instrument and announced that,  in addition to proposals made in December 1996, they would  like to table further proposals. These should be read  together with proposals previously submitted. They said that  former proposals would be complementary but not inconsistent  with the new proposal. On the suggestion of CHINA, the Chair  agreed to include the G-77/China proposal in a Miscellaneous  document.

PERU pointed out that Annex I Parties' proposals lack  numbers and that in this sense the meeting was a  'disappointment'. She noted the lack of figures for 2005 in  the EU proposal and submitted a proposal that includes a  demand for Annex I Parties to reduce emissions by 15% in  2005. The Chair apologized for interrupting the statements  of many Parties but added that he is 'trying to conduct the  business in the best way' and warned that the number of  Parties he will interrupt at the next session may be even  greater.

AGBM-6 was adjourned at 12.15 pm on Friday, 7 March 1997.

# OTHER SUBSIDIARY BODIES

## SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE

On 6 March, AGBM Chair Estrada announced that progress was  made on the election of officers other than the Chair for  the SBSTA. MOROCCO, on behalf of the African Group, reported  the following nominees: Mr. Soobaraj Nayroo Sok Appadu  (Mauritius) as the Vice-Chair of SBSTA and Mr. Alvaro José  Rodriguez (Colombia) as Rapporteur. JAMAICA thanked the  African Group for this offer and requested that it be  recorded. SBSTA Chair Tibor Farago (Hungary) noted that the  official election would take place during the next SBSTA  session.

## SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION

On 6 March, SBI Vice-Chair José Romero (Switzerland)  reconvened SBI-5 to finish its work from the previous week.  He presented the draft conclusions of the informal group on  financial and technical cooperation chaired by Manuel Dengo  (Costa Rica). On review of the financial mechanism, the SBI  welcomed new information provided at this session, including  the report prepared by the GEF (FCCC/SBI/1997/2) and two  workshops conducted by the GEF. The conclusions note that  the Parties requested additional time for review of this  information. The SBI also noted that information from other  sources, including Parties, would be particularly important  for facilitating a fully-informed review. The SBI added that  the report of the UN General Assembly Special Session for  the review of the implementation of Agenda 21 would be of  interest for reviewing the GEF.

The SBI agreed to guidelines on the review process, invited  Parties to submit views on the financial mechanism by 15 May  1997, and requested the secretariat to prepare a compilation  and a synthesis report of the submissions for SBI-6. The SBI  also highlighted the need for full replenishment of the GEF.  The proposed guidelines note objectives, methodology and  criteria for the review. The objectives will be to review  the financial mechanism and to take appropriate measures  regarding its: conformity with Article 11 of the Convention;  conformity with the COP's guidance; effectiveness in  implementing the Convention and in providing financial  resources on a grant or concessional basis, including the  transfer of technology; and effectiveness in providing  resources to developing country Parties under Article 4.3.

Under methodology, the review shall draw upon the following  sources: information provided by Parties on their  experiences with the financial mechanism; annual reviews by  the COP on how the financial mechanism's activities conform  with the COP's guidance; the GEF's annual report to the COP;  reports from the GEF monitoring and evaluation programme;  reports from the Commission on Sustainable Development and  relevant bilateral and multilateral funding institutions;  and relevant information provided by other intergovernmental  and non-governmental organizations.

Under criteria, the effectiveness of the financial mechanism  will be assessed taking into account the following:  transparency of decision-making processes; adequacy,  predictability and timely disbursement of funds for  activities in developing country Parties; responsiveness and  efficiency of the GEF project cycle and expedited  procedures, including its operational strategy; amount of  resources provided to developing country Parties, including  financing for technical assistance and investment projects;  amount of finance leveraged; and sustainability of funded  projects.

The SBI also took note of the information on relevant action  by the GEF Council, contained in document  FCCC/SBI/1997/Misc.3, and requested the secretariat to  provide subsequent SBI sessions with such information as it  becomes available. The Vice-Chair thanked delegates for  their participation and adjourned SBI-5.

# A BRIEF ANALYSIS OF AGBM-6

Bonn hosted the February/March meetings of the four FCCC  subsidiary bodies, marking their first sessions in the  secretariat's new home town. SBSTA, SBI and AG-13 met during  the first week to continue their work on issues such as  budgetary matters, joint implementation, technology transfer  and a multilateral consultative process. AGBM-6 set itself  the task of 'streamlining' its Framework Compilation of  proposals into a negotiating text for its next session. In  this regard, AGBM-6 was neither a disappointment nor a  ripping success. Delegates managed to merge or eliminate  some overlapping provisions within the myriad of proposals  contained in the Compilation. They also officially gave the  Chair a mandate to produce a draft negotiating text.  However, other proposals emerged in the eleventh hour, such  as one by the G-77 on QELROs, which signaled that AGBM-6 did  not foster much progress on several fundamental points,  despite the hopes of many observers. This meeting did not  necessarily eliminate the number of proposals on the table,  it simply straightened and sorted them. AGBM-6 brought the  Parties one step, albeit a small one, closer to fulfilling  its mandate.

A number of past disagreements did not rear their heads at  this meeting, most notably over scientific uncertainty of  climate change or the form of the new instrument to be  adopted at COP-3. Nonetheless, the meeting unveiled a host  of disagreements over the content of the protocol regarding  issues such as timetables and targets, policies and  measures, and compensation, and foreshadowed a number of  battles on the horizon before Kyoto. In short, when it comes  to the concepts now on the table, there still seems to be  fundamental disagreement. AGBM Chair Estrada, in his opening  comments, noted that one serious problem facing these  negotiations was disagreement among developed countries on  the content and treatment of issues that will form the basis  of the protocol.

Indeed several noticeable disagreements, mostly trans- Atlantic, emerged with respect to the targets and timetable  for QELROs and the specifics related to policies and  measures. Delegates also differed on the idea of  differentiating between Annex I Parties with regard to each  Parties' goal for lowered emissions. Developing countries,  as well, voiced concerns, particularly on proposals  containing unspecified new annexes and proposals on JI and  trading.

QELROs: During the debate over QELROs, Parties voiced a  number of diverse, often fundamentally different,  perspectives. The EU, Switzerland and Norway were the only  Annex I countries proposing specific targets. The strongest  of these proposals came from the EU after its Ministerial  Council meeting, calling for a 15% reduction across the EU  by 2010, replacing a host of individual commitments from  members of the EU. According to some, this proposal could  overshadow the AOSIS protocol goal of 20% by 2005. The US,  on the other hand, proposed emissions trading, multi-year  emissions budgets, borrowing of emissions from future  budgets and joint implementation with developing countries  for credit. Apart from the few delegations who provided  specific QELROs proposals, most governments based their  proposals for strengthening commitments in Article 4.2 (a)  and (b) on a call for flexibility. The aim of  differentiation, as it was recurrently stated by its  supporters during plenary and roundtable discussions, is to  achieve maximum flexibility. Whereas some countries,  including the US, Australia and New Zealand continued to  insist on flexible measures, such as JI and emissions  trading, others used the term 'flexibility' for proposing to  introduce different levels of commitment.

This request for 'fairness' is based on the Berlin Mandate's  call for a consideration of different starting points of  countries. If the concept of differentiation would find its  way into a protocol or other legal instrument, most Parties  would probably present 'special circumstances,' which could  move the debate from its essence - the reduction of GHG  emissions - to intractable distribution questions. Poland  suggested resolving this problem by aggregating countries  into groups. Germany and Russia followed this concept by  proposing a certain degree of flexibility for countries with  economies in transition. Norway and Iceland put forward a  specific formula for differentiation for all countries.  Australia, Iran, Japan and Poland proposed indicators or  criteria on which differentiation could be based. Not many  of these, however, addressed the more practical problems  concerning information and quantification to determine a  fair and equitable set of commitments. The EU's opposition  to differentiating commitments caused some controversy, in  particular after the EU presented its Environment Ministers'  Council decision to implement its own, quantified targets by  taking on board joint commitments and internal  burdensharing. Several Parties stated that they viewed the  internal burdensharing concept of the EU as a contradiction  to their opposition to differentiation. The US, formerly  very strongly opposed to alternatives to a flat-rate  approach, even suggested including the table with the  differentiated reduction targets as a proposal for the  protocol 'to have a full range of options.' Having lost  strong speakers against differentiation, the debate seems to  have moved slightly from whether differentiation is  possible, to how differentiation can be accomplished.

The bottom line, however, still is that differentiation  needs to be preceded by countries' firm proposals for firm  targets and timetables. A number of developing countries  were strongly suspicious of both the US proposal for  emissions trading and the EU proposal on P&Ms and argued  that both would prove far too complicated for a protocol.

### COMPENSATION

Developed countries voiced their own concern  about a potentially complicated matter as another developing  country issue came to the fore: impacts of P&Ms and  compensation for these impacts. The G-77, particularly the  oil-producing countries, called for concrete compensation  mechanisms for adverse impacts on developing countries  arising from implementation of response measures. Iran,  Nigeria and Kuwait provided some detailed suggestions on  these mechanisms, including the establishment of a  compensation fund. Uzbekistan proposed to request the IPCC  to make recommendations on ways to reduce negative impacts  of Annex I commitments on developing countries. Reaction to  these requests reflected that some delegations did not take  the proposal too seriously and perhaps viewed it as a  delaying strategy. One delegate asked if developed countries  that suffer from increased oil prices would be eligible for  compensation or if developed countries who help with  adaptation measures would liable for injury. Within the G-77, AOSIS delegations responded that compensation should not  concern lost revenues, but should address damages arising  from temperature increases and sea level rise. Some  participants expressed surprise that AOSIS did not voice  stronger support for this proposal given its vulnerability  to the effects of climate change. Others, however, suggested  that AOSIS countries are fully aware of the practical  problems in measuring, quantifying and billing for the  impacts of climate change and a strong stance on this issue  would merely be another stone in the road.

Nonetheless, some participants reported that the G-77  proposal announced during the final day will include a  reference to compensation. Should support for this idea  spread among members, the picture could become even more  complicated. The already complicated mix of proposals on  QELROs, according to many, raised more questions than it  answered: how will JI and emissions trading be squared with  QELROs? Under what conditions could developing countries  accept AIJ and emissions trading? How will the EU stance  against differentiation among Annex I countries square with  the fact that emission reduction targets among EU countries  range from a 40% increase to a 30% reduction? How closely  will the US cling to many of its positions, when a number of  delegations appear steadfastly opposed? Nonetheless, one  participant reported that the G-77 proposals announced on  the final day includes a 'weak' reference to compensation.  Should this concept become a focus of discussion, it will  add another factor to an already complicated picture and  delay progress towards a protocol.

### SBSTA

Discussions in other subsidiary bodies are linked to  the AGBM and could provide marker of progress and an  indicator for future negotiations. This round of subsidiary  body meetings was marked by a relative absence of science- related disagreements. Past SBSTA sessions involved  controversies over use of the IPCC Second Assessment Report  (SAR). In contrast, during AGBM-6, few if any delegates used  scientific uncertainty to buttress their arguments. In fact,  the EU cited the SAR's results in presenting its proposed  15% emissions reduction target for the year 2010.  Furthermore, IPCC Chair Bert Bolin created little reaction  on the floor in stating that 'no reasonable future reduction  by Annex I countries would stabilize global emissions.'  Absence of a heated science debate and the methodological  tasks SBSTA outlined for the work plan indicate that  upcoming activities for the scientific community should  focus on questions of implementation. It remains to be seen,  however, what role scientists might play in assessing the  impacts of P&M implementation by Annex I countries.

### AG13

AG13's discussions on a future multilateral  consultative process (MCP), while at an early stage,  produced what was characterized as its own Framework  Compilation from past proposals and, based on discussions,  could likely encounter problems similar to the AGBM. While  not exactly a microcosm, there is some solid agreement as  well as divergent perspectives as AG13 is heading toward a  negotiating process. Chair Patrick Széll opened AG13-4  stating that the group cannot continue on a 'diet of general  statements' and, by the end of the session, noted that the  group has achieved more than expected. Unlike the AGBM,  delegates displayed a stronger willingness to compromise and  incorporate proposals. This was particularly obvious when  China and the EU tried to incorporate their proposals into  the text. Like the AGBM, however, AG13's efforts to clarify  the form of a future MCP leave many details unclear,  particularly in defining its field of expertise and in  squaring its work with that of the SBI and SBSTA. Similarly,  AG13-4 indicated that some differences will need to be  resolved regarding the fundamental question of whether an  MCP should have an advisory or a supervisory role.

### SBI

The SBI's discussions also indicated some areas of  future disagreements. Delegates requested more time and more  detailed information on many newly-proposed programmes, and  expressed particular concern over the post-Kyoto process.  Budget items for peer reviews of developing country national  communications and mentions of emissions trading were not  popular with developing countries. Developed countries  voiced concern over a proposed increase in secretariat staff  and the need for more resources. Delegates likewise  requested more time to consider details of the GEF review.  When discussing arrangements for COP-3, China and several  other developing countries complained that negotiations on  the Geneva Ministerial Declaration during COP-2 took them by  surprise and, as a result, insisted on language noting that  any new substantive proposals must be circulated six months  prior to COP-3. When other delegations noted that standard  UN practice provided ample warning, statements hinting at  'conspiracy' and a lack of transparency arose frequently.  This debate, waged at length, could prove particularly  telling for Kyoto.

### LOOKING TOWARDS KYOTO

During discussion on differentiation,  a statement from the US noted that indicators can be read  two ways. The indicators of progress for the climate change  negotiations are equally equivocal. Whether these indicators  signal that the AGBM is making slow, solid progress or  slouching toward Kyoto seems a matter of opinion, as  evidenced by participants' comments.

One noted that the number of meetings will not hasten the  progress of real action to combat climate change. Progress  will occur when the constituencies that stand to gain from  action are mobilized and supportive of the potentially  painful measures that could be required. To date, with the  exception of small island States, the groups that would  benefit directly from action often appear only via general  if not vague terms, such as 'future generations of mankind'  and 'global benefit of all.' Those who face immediate  monetary losses, however, are far more tangible and  frequently waiting in the lobby. Another observer noted that  AGBM-6 marked a milestone if only because the number of  government delegates was surpassed by the number of NGO  representatives, most of whom came from industry.

One veteran observer commented that these negotiations were  difficult and, given the scale of both the problem and the  changes entailed by a solution, delegates were making  considerable progress and will accomplish their assigned  task. Another participant summarized the views of many  skeptics by noting a certain irony: while Parties talked,  positioned and bargained, the Rhein overflowed its banks due  to unseasonably warm weather and melting snow in the  mountains.

Chair Estrada made ample use of the gavel in the final  sessions of AGBM-6 in an attempt to keep Parties focused on  the proposals and away from lengthy debate. He noted that he  may have to employ a heavy gavel with even more frequency at  future AGBM meetings. Of all the signals and indicators  regarding future sessions, this one is probably the safest  bet.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR

## CLIMATE CHANGE

### FCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES

The next sessions of the subsidiary  bodies are scheduled to take place in Bonn from 28 July to 7  August 1997 at the Hotel Maritim. SBSTA, SBI and AG-13 will  meet from 28-30 July and will likely meet once more the  following week. The AGBM will begin on Thursday, 31 July.  The subsidiary bodies are scheduled to meet again from 20-31  October 1997 at a conference facility in Bonn to be  determined. At present, all subsidiary bodies except for  AG13 are scheduled to meet in October.

### COP-3

The third Conference of the Parties is scheduled for  1-12 December 1997 in Kyoto, Japan. COP-3 will immediately  allocate the completion of decisions of the Berlin Mandate  process to a sessional Committee of the Whole, open to all  delegations. The political negotiations will be finalized in  a ministerial segment, which will be convened from 8-10  December and where the final text of a protocol or other  legal instrument will be adopted. For all meetings related  to the FCCC, contact the secretariat in Bonn, Germany; tel:  +49-228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail:  secretariat@unfccc.de. Also try the FCCC home page at  http://www.unfccc.de and UNEP's Information Unit for  Conventions at http://www.unep.ch/iuc.html.

### WORKSHOP ON ACTIVITIES IMPLEMENTED JOINTLY IN THE AFRICAN  AND MIDDLE EAST REGION

This workshop will be held in Cairo,  Egypt, on a date to be determined, and will be sponsored by  the International Centre for Environment and Development  (ICED) and the US Initiative on Joint Implementation  (USIJI). The workshop intends to contribute to the  understanding of the concept of AIJ and international  discussions supporting the FCCC, and provide an opportunity  for countries to identify and discuss AIJ projects of  regional importance. For more information, contact: Eng  Hadia El Zayyat; tel: +20-2-304-6032; fax: +20-2-304-6033;  e-mail: iced@intouch.com, or Jackie Kreiger; tel: +1-202- 586-3487; fax: +1-202-586-3485/86l; e-mail:  cmst@igc.apc.org.

### METHANE MITIGATION CONFERENCE

This conference, scheduled  from 3-5 June 1997, will be held at the National Agriculture  University Campus, in Kiev, Ukraine. The conference intends  to educate participants on the technical and economic  aspects of methane mitigation. For information, contact Tom  Kerr at the US Environmental Protection Agency; tel: +1-202- 233-9768; fax: +1-202-233-9569; e-mail:  kerr.tom@epamail.epa.gov.

### INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON TECHNOLOGIES FOR ACTIVITIES  IMPLEMENTED JOINTLY

This conference is scheduled from 26-29  May 1997, at the Westin Bayshore Hotel in Vancouver, Canada.  The main aim of the conference is to provide the audience  with speakers who have practical experience with  technologies suitable for AIJ. They will report on their  activities, highlighting achievements and potential  pitfalls. For more information, contact Andrea Smith; tel:  +44-0-1242-680753; fax: +44-0-1242-680758; e-mail:  andrea@ieagreen.demon.co.uk. Also try their WWW site:  http://www.ieagreen.org.uk.

### INTERNATIONAL CLIMATE CHANGE CONFERENCE AND TECHNOLOGIES  EXHIBITION

This conference is scheduled from 12-13 June  1997 in Baltimore, Maryland, USA, and is sponsored by the  International Climate Change Partnership and the US  Environmental Protection Agency. The conference will feature  two days of conference sessions designed to demonstrate to  the private and public sectors that the climate change  policy process is moving forward in such a manner that will  affect the global economy and, therefore, corporate business  practices. For information contact: International Climate  Change Conference; tel: +1-703-807-4052; +1-703-243-2874.

### WORLD SUMMIT OF CITIES FOR CLIMATE PROTECTION

This  conference, scheduled from 27-28 November 1997, in Nagoya,  Japan, will raise awareness of the importance of combating  climate change at the local level. Participants will discuss  ways that local governments can effectively reduce their  greenhouse gas emissions. For more information contact  Philip Jessup, Cities for Climate Protection; tel: +1-416- 392-1462; fax: +1-416-392-1478; e-mail: pjessup@iclei.org.

## COMMISSION ON SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

### CSD

The fifth session of the CSD is scheduled for 8-25  April 1997. The Special Session of the UN General Assembly  for review of the implementation of Agenda 21 is scheduled  for 23-27 June 1997. For information on the CSD or the  Special Session contact: Andrey Vasilyev, UN Division for  Sustainable Development; tel: +1-212-963-5949; fax: +1-212- 963-4260; e-mail: vasilyev@un.org. Also try the DPCSD home  page at http://www.un.org/DPCSD and the Special Session home  page at http://www.un.org/dpcsd/earthsummit/.

## GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY

### GEF

The proposed schedule of GEF Council Meetings in 1997  includes: 18-19 May, NGO Consultation; 20-22 May, GEF  Council Meeting; 2-3 November, NGO Consultation; and 4-6  November, GEF Council Meeting. For more information contact  Marie Morgan at the GEF Secretariat; tel: +1-202-473-1128;  fax: +1- 202-522-3240. Also try the GEF home page at  http://www.worldbank.org/html/gef.

## TRADE AND ENVIRONMENT

### TRADE AND ENVIRONMENT: CONFLICT OR COMPATIBILITY?

This  conference is scheduled for 11 April 1997 at Chatham House  in London and is sponsored by the Royal Institute for  International Affairs, the American Chamber of Commerce (UK)  and Cameron May Ltd. This conference will provide the first  opportunity for businesses, governments representatives,  NGOs and academics to analyze the current state of the  debate in the wake of the WTO meeting. For more information  contact: Sharon Moore, the Conference Unit, Royal Institute  for International Affairs; +(44) 171-957 5700; fax: +(44)  171-321 2045. Also try http://www.riia.org.