---
title: "SUMMARY OF THE SEVENTH CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE UN FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE: 29 OCTOBER - 10 NOVEMBER 2001"
id: enb12189e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12189e
date: 2001-11-10
abstract: "The Seventh Conference of the Parties (COP-7) to the United  Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) was held  in Marrakesh, Morocco, from 29 October - 10 November 2001. Over  4400 participants from 172 governments, 234 intergovernmental,  non-governmental and other observer organizations, and 166 media  outlets were in attendance. The meeting sought to finalize  agreement on the operational details for commitments on reducing  emissions of greenhouse gases under the 1997 Kyoto Protocol. It  also sought agreement on actions to strengthen implementation of  the UNFCCC. In attempting to achieve these goals, which were set  out in the 1998 Buenos Aires Plan of Action (BAPA), COP-7 intended  to bring to a close three years of negotiations, and complete  tasks left unfinished at COP-6 Parts I and II held in The Hague  and Bonn, respectively. The Bonn Agreements - a political  declaration on outstanding issues that was adopted at COP-6 Part  II in July 2001 - served as the basis for delegates striving to  finish their work."
---

From 30 October to 6 November delegates met in negotiating groups,  closed drafting groups and informal consultations in their attempt  to resolve outstanding issues. These included the mechanisms under  the Protocol, a compliance system, accounting, reporting and  review under Protocol Articles 5 (methodological issues), 7  (communication of information) and 8 (review of information), and  land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF). Ongoing  negotiations were also held on draft COP decisions relating to the  least developed countries (LDCs), the Consultative Group of  Experts (CGE), and input to the 2002 World Summit on Sustainable  Development (WSSD).

The fifteenth sessions of the COP's subsidiary bodies met during  COP-7 from 29 October to 8 November. The subsidiary bodies adopted  draft conclusions on a number of issues, including national  communications, administrative and financial matters, and  methodological issues.

On Wednesday, 7 November, COP-7's High-Level Segment began, with  ministers and senior officials seeking to bring negotiations to a  successful conclusion. Informal consultations were facilitated by  Minister Valli Moosa (South Africa) and Secretary of State  Philippe Roch (Switzerland). After protracted bilateral and  multilateral talks, a package deal on LULUCF, mechanisms, Protocol  Articles 5, 7 and 8, and the input to the WSSD was proposed on  Thursday evening, 8 November. Although the deal was accepted by  most regional groups, including the G-77/China and the EU, the  Umbrella Group (a loose alliance of Annex I Parties that includes  Canada, Australia, Japan, the Russian Federation, and New Zealand)  did not join the consensus, with key issues of dispute including  eligibility requirements and bankability under the mechanisms.  However, after further extensive negotiations throughout Friday  and into Saturday morning, a package deal was agreed, with key  features including a compliance eligibility requirement,  consideration of LULUCF Principles in reporting of such data and  limited banking of units generated by sinks under the Clean  Development Mechanism (CDM).

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE UNFCCC AND THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

Climate change is considered one of the most serious threats to  the sustainability of the world's environment, human health and  well-being, and the global economy. Mainstream scientists agree  that the Earth's climate is being affected by the build-up of  greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide, caused by human  activities. A majority of scientists believe that precautionary  and prompt action is necessary.

The international political response to climate change took shape  with the development of the UNFCCC. Adopted in 1992, the UNFCCC  sets out a framework for action aimed at stabilizing atmospheric  concentrations of greenhouse gases at a level that would prevent  human-induced actions from leading to 'dangerous interference'  with the climate system. The UNFCCC entered into force on 21 March  1994. It now has 186 Parties.

### THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

In 1995, the Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin  Mandate was established by COP-1 to reach agreement on a further  step in efforts to combat climate change. Following intense  negotiations culminating at COP-3, in Kyoto, Japan, in December  1997, delegates agreed to a Protocol to the UNFCCC that commits  developed countries and countries making the transition to a  market economy to achieve quantified targets for decreasing their  emissions of greenhouse gases. These countries, known under the  UNFCCC as Annex I Parties, committed themselves to reducing their  overall emissions of six greenhouse gases by at least 5% below  1990 levels over the period between 2008 and 2012, with specific  targets varying from country to country. The Protocol also  provided the basis for three mechanisms to assist Annex I Parties  in meeting their national targets cost-effectively - an emissions  trading system, joint implementation (JI) of emissions-reduction  projects between Annex I Parties, and a Clean Development  Mechanism (CDM) to encourage joint projects between Annex I and  non-Annex I (developing country) Parties.

It was left for subsequent meetings to decide on most of the rules  and operational details that will determine how these cuts in  emissions are achieved and how countries' efforts are measured and  assessed. Although 84 countries have signed the Protocol, most  have been waiting for the negotiation of these operational details  before deciding whether to ratify. To enter into force, the  Protocol must be ratified by 55 Parties to the UNFCCC, including  Annex I Parties representing at least 55% of the total carbon  dioxide emissions for 1990. To date, 40 Parties have ratified the  Protocol, including one Annex I Party, Romania.

### THE BUENOS AIRES PLAN OF ACTION

COP-4 met in Buenos Aires,  Argentina, in November 1998, to set out a schedule for reaching  agreement on the operational details of the Protocol and for  strengthening implementation of the UNFCCC itself. This work  schedule was outlined in a decision known as the Buenos Aires Plan  of Action (BAPA). The critical deadline under the BAPA was COP-6,  where Parties were to reach agreement on a package of issues.  Pressing Protocol-related issues needing resolution included rules  relating to the mechanisms, a regime for assessing Parties'  compliance, and accounting methods for national emissions and  emissions reductions. Rules on crediting countries for carbon  sinks were also to be addressed. Issues under the UNFCCC requiring  resolution included questions of capacity building, the  development and transfer of technology, and assistance to those  developing countries that are especially vulnerable to the adverse  effects of climate change, or to actions taken by industrialized  countries to combat climate change.

Numerous formal and informal meetings and consultations were held  during 1999 and 2000 to help lay the foundations for an agreement  at COP-6. However, as COP-6 drew near, political positions on the  key issues remained entrenched, with little indication of  willingness to compromise or move forward.

### COP-6 PART I

COP-6 and the resumed thirteenth sessions of the  UNFCCC's subsidiary bodies were held in The Hague, the  Netherlands, from 13-25 November 2000. During the second week of  negotiations, COP-6 President Jan Pronk, Minister of Housing,  Spatial Planning and Environment of the Netherlands, attempted to  facilitate progress on the many disputed political and technical  issues by convening high-level informal Plenary sessions to  address the key political issues, which he grouped into four  'clusters' or 'boxes,' as follows: (a) capacity building,  technology transfer, adverse effects and guidance to the financial  mechanism; (b) mechanisms; (c) land use, land-use change and  forestry (LULUCF); and, (d) compliance, policies and measures  (P&Ms), and accounting, reporting and review under Protocol  Articles 5 (methodological issues), 7 (communication of  information) and 8 (review of information).

By Thursday, 23 November, negotiations appeared stalled, and  President Pronk distributed a Note containing his proposals on key  issues in an attempt to encourage a breakthrough. After almost 36  hours of intense talks on the President's proposals, negotiators  could not achieve an agreement, with financial issues,  supplementarity in the use of the mechanisms, compliance and  LULUCF proving to be particular sticking points. On Saturday  afternoon, 25 November, President Pronk announced that delegates  had failed to reach agreement. Delegates agreed to suspend COP-6,  and resume their work in 2001.

A number of meetings and consultations were convened after COP-6  Part I in an effort to get negotiations back on track. In addition  in March 2001, the US declared its opposition to the Protocol,  stating that it believed it to be 'fatally flawed,' as it would  damage its economy and exempted developing countries from fully  participating.

### COP-6 PART II

COP-6 Part II and the fourteenth sessions of the  UNFCCC's subsidiary bodies met in Bonn, Germany, from 16-27 July  2001. On Thursday, 19 July, the High-Level Segment of the resumed  COP-6 began, with participants striving to make a breakthrough by  achieving agreement on a 'political' decision on key outstanding  issues. On Saturday night, after protracted consultations,  President Pronk presented his proposal for a draft political  decision outlining agreements on core elements of the BAPA.  However, in spite of several Parties announcing that they could  support the political decision, disagreements surfaced over the  section on compliance.

President Pronk held ongoing consultations on this section until  Monday morning, when the ministers finally agreed to adopt the  original political decision from Saturday, with a revised section  on compliance. The political decision - or 'Bonn Agreements' - was  approved by the ministers in Plenary late Monday morning, and  formally adopted by the COP on Wednesday evening, 25 July. High- level discussions over the weekend also resulted in a Political  Declaration by a number of developed countries, in which they  pledged additional funding for climate change activities for  developing countries.

Although draft decisions were approved on several key issues,  delegates were unable to complete all their work on the  mechanisms, compliance and LULUCF. Since not all texts in the  entire 'package' of decisions were completed, all draft decisions  were forwarded to COP-7, where delegates were to attempt to  conclude their negotiations. The outstanding texts related to  LULUCF, the mechanisms, compliance, P&Ms, and Protocol Articles 5,  7 and 8.

# COP-7 REPORT

The Seventh Conference of the Parties (COP-7) to the UNFCCC opened  on Monday, 29 October 2001. COP-6 President Jan Pronk opened COP- 7, suggesting that the events of 11 September had cast  international agreements in a new light, and noting that the Bonn  Agreements demonstrated the effectiveness of multilateralism and  international cooperation in solving global problems within the  framework of the UN. He expressed confidence that COP-7 would  complete the process of translating the Bonn Agreements into legal  language, and would bring work on the Buenos Aires Plan of Action  (BAPA) to a successful conclusion.

The COP elected Mohamed Elyazghi, Morocco's Minister of Territory  Planning, Urban Management, Housing and Environment, as COP-7  President. President Elyazghi welcomed delegates to Morocco,  adding that this was the first UNFCCC COP to be held in Africa. He  thanked COP-6 President Pronk for his perseverance and for leaving  an 'indelible mark' on the process.

Welcoming remarks were also made by Abdelaziz Saâdi, President of  the Regional Council of Marrakesh, Omar Jazouli, President of the  Urban Community of Marrakesh, and Michael Zammit Cutajar,  Executive Secretary of the UNFCCC.

Delegates then heard general statements from a number of Parties.  Many speakers thanked UNFCCC Executive Secretary Cutajar, COP-6  President Pronk, and the Secretariat for their invaluable  contributions to the progress made in the negotiations. Several  speakers, including the G-77/China, EU and the Central Group 11  (CG-11, a group of 11 central and eastern European countries),  supported entry into force of the Protocol in time for the WSSD.

Iran, on behalf of the G-77/China, supported completion of work  forwarded from COP-6 Part II, adding that this is not the right  forum to raise the question of new or additional commitments by  developing countries. Burkina Faso, on behalf of the Africa Group,  underscored the high expectations of the international community  that COP-7 would be a success. Switzerland, on behalf of the  Environmental Integrity Group, stressed the need for entry into  force of the Protocol. Mali, speaking for the LDCs, hoped that  developing countries, and especially LDCs, would benefit from  meaningful assistance. Australia and Japan welcomed President  Elyazghi's intention to consult and report back to the COP before  the High-Level Segment on the agenda item 'second review of the  adequacy of Article 4.2 (a) and (b),' and said they looked forward  to a full discussion of this issue at COP-8. Belgium, on behalf of  the European Union, said the review of commitments should not be  debated at COP-7 or the WSSD, but only after the Protocol has  entered into force, possibly at COP-8.

### ORGANIZATIONAL MATTERS

On 29 October, President Elyazghi reported  that 42 Parties had so far ratified the Kyoto Protocol and called  on the remaining Parties to do so in time for the WSSD. On the  rules of procedure, the COP decided to continue applying the draft  rules (FCCC/CP/2001/6 and Add.1), with the exception of rule 42  (voting). Participants then adopted the agenda, with the exception  of the item 'second review of the adequacy of UNFCCC Article  4.2(a) and (b)' (review of commitments), which was held in  abeyance. The matter was subsequently taken up in informal  consultations. However, no agreement was reached, and on Saturday,  10 November, President Elyazghi informed the COP that  intersessional consultations would be held, and the item placed on  the provisional agenda for the sixteenth sessions of the  subsidiary bodies (SB-16).

Following consultations, members of the COP-7 Bureau other than  the President were elected in Plenary on 9 November. The Vice  Presidents elected were: Mohammed Barkindo (Nigeria), A.  Gopinathan (India), Mohamed Al-Maslamani (Qatar), Andrej Kranjc  (Slovenia), Alexandre Bedritsky (Russian Federation), Max Rai  (Papua New Guinea), and Karsten Sach (Germany). Gonzalo Menendez  (Panama) was appointed Rapporteur. Raúl Estrada-Oyuela (Argentina)  and Halldor Thoreirsson (Iceland) were named Chairs of SBI and  SBSTA, respectively. The COP also decided to admit as observers  those organizations listed in document FCCC/CP/2001/7.

The COP considered and adopted a draft decision  (FCCC/CP/2001/L.23) forwarded by the SBI to the COP on 8 November  on the date and venue of COP-8. The decision states that COP-8  will be held from 23 October to 1 November 2002, and notes the  expression of interest by India in hosting the conference. It  requests consultations to be continued between the Executive  Secretary and India, and notification of the outcome to be  reported not later than 24 November 2001. It requests the Bureau  to decide on the venue of COP-8 at its next meeting in December  2001.

Draft conclusions on the calendar of meetings of Convention bodies  2005-2007 (FCCC/CP/2001/CRP.15) were adopted by the SBI on 8  November and by the COP on 9 November 2001. The COP adopted the  report on credentials (FCCC/CP/2001/9) on Friday, 9 November.

## IMPLEMENTATION OF THE BUENOS AIRES PLAN OF ACTION: ADOPTION OF  DECISIONS GIVING EFFECT TO THE BONN AGREEMENTS

The critical issues addressed during COP-7 related to the  implementation of the BAPA. The following section of this report  starts with a synopsis of the financial and funding decisions  completed at COP-6 Part II and adopted at COP-7 (Editor's note:  Details of the negotiations at COP-6 Part II that led to these  decisions are available in Earth Negotiations Bulletin Vol.12, No.  176.) The section then outlines the substantive discussions and  decisions on issues that needed further negotiation and completion  at COP-7. These issues included the Protocol mechanisms,  compliance, and national systems, adjustments and guidelines under  Protocol Articles 5, 7 and 8.

### COMPLETED DECISIONS FORWARDED FOR ADOPTION

Eight draft decisions  on financial issues were agreed at COP-6 Part II, and forwarded  for adoption during the closing COP-7 Plenary. Previously agreed  decisions were also forwarded on activities implemented jointly  (AIJ) and on the impact of single emissions in the commitment  period.

###     Capacity Building:

The draft decision on capacity building in  developing countries (FCCC/CP/2001/L.2) requests the Global  Environment Facility (GEF) to report on its progress in support of  the implementation of the capacity-building framework, and urges  an operating entity of the financial mechanism to adopt a  streamlined and expedited approach in financing activities of the  framework. It requests the COP to draw on information from  national communications and reports from the GEF and other  agencies for the review of progress in the implementation of the  framework.

The draft decision on capacity building in countries with  economies in transition (EITs) (FCCC/CP/2001/L.3) sets out in an  annex a capacity-building framework. It recommends that COP/MOP-1  adopt a decision endorsing a framework for capacity building under  the UNFCCC that parallels the framework contained in the annex.  Both draft decisions give immediate effect to the frameworks.

###     Guidance to the GEF:

This draft decision (FCCC/CP/2001/L.4/Rev.1)  states that the GEF should provide financial resources to  developing country Parties, in particular to the LDCs and Small  Island Developing States (SIDS), including for implementing Stage  II adaptation activities and establishing pilot or demonstration  projects to show how adaptation planning and assessment can be  translated into projects. The draft decision further urges the GEF  to adopt a streamlined approach in financing activities within the  framework for capacity building in developing countries.

###     Development and Transfer of Technologies:

The draft decision  (FCCC/CP/2001/L.10) establishes an expert group on technology  transfer, and requests the GEF to provide financial support  through the special climate change fund for the implementation of  the framework annexed to the draft decision. The framework sets  out the institutional arrangements for technology transfer and the  role and composition of the expert group.

###     Adverse Effects:

Parties agreed to separate decisions on UNFCCC  Article 4.8 (adverse effects) and 4.9 (LDCs), and Protocol Article  3.14 (adverse effects). The draft decision on implementation of  UNFCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9 (FCCC/CP/2001/L.12) states that the  GEF should support activities on information and methodologies,  and on vulnerability and adaptation. It also decides that the  special climate change fund, and/or the adaptation fund and other  bilateral and multilateral sources should fund activities on  adaptation, improving and monitoring of diseases and vectors, and  capacity building. It further decides to establish a work  programme on LDCs to: strengthen existing and establish national  climate change secretariats; provide training in negotiating  skills and language; and support the preparation of National  Adaptation Programmes of Action (NAPAs). In addition, the decision  provides for the establishment of an LDC fund. It also decides  that the GEF, the special climate change fund and other bilateral  and multilateral sources, should fund activities to assist LDCs.

The draft decision on Protocol Article 3.14 (FCCC/CP/2001/L.13)  decides to develop guidelines to help determine if Annex I Parties  are striving to minimize adverse effects, and agrees that Annex II  Parties should give priority to assisting developing countries  highly dependent on the export and consumption of fossil fuels in  diversifying their economies.

###     Funding:

The draft decision on funding under the UNFCCC  (FCCC/CP/2001/L.14) states that: there is a need for funding that  is new and additional to GEF and multilateral and bilateral  funding; predictable funding should be available to non-Annex I  Parties; and a special climate change fund should be established.  The draft decision on funding under the Protocol  (FCCC/CP/2001/L.15) establishes an adaptation fund.

Delegates also adopted SBSTA conclusions on AIJ  (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.15), according to which the SBSTA takes note of  the fifth annual synthesis report on AIJ, invites Parties to  submit their views on their experiences with the pilot phase and  decides that the deadline for submissions for the sixth annual  synthesis report is 17 June 2002.

### DRAFT DECISIONS FORWARDED FOR ELABORATION, COMPLETION AND  ADOPTION

Draft decisions under the BAPA were forwarded from COP-6  Part II to COP-7 for further negotiation and completion on a  number of key issues, including Protocol Articles 5, 7 and 8,  LULUCF, the mechanisms, compliance, and policies and measures.

###     Protocol Articles 5, 7 and 8:

A negotiating group dealing with  Articles 5, 7 and 8, which set out guidelines for reporting and  review of information on Protocol implementation, met throughout  both weeks of COP-7. The group considered a number of issues in  the draft guidelines for preparation of information under Article  7 and in the draft guidelines for review under Article 8, as well  as related draft COP-7 and COP/MOP-1 decisions. The group also  briefly revisited and agreed on draft COP-7 and COP/MOP-1  decisions on Article 5.1 (national systems) and on further  developing Article 5.2 (adjustments) technical guidance.

The group was chaired by Harald Dovland (Norway). Two small  drafting groups were formed, regularly reporting back to the  negotiating group. Helen Plume (New Zealand) chaired the drafting  group on LULUCF-related issues, and the second group, dealing with  all other issues, was co-chaired by Festus Luboyera (South Africa)  and Newton Paciornik (Brazil). During the High-Level Segment,  ministers resolved several outstanding issues, and on 10 November,  the COP adopted four decisions. The following summary synthesizes  discussions on the most contentious issues and outlines the  decisions.

###     Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry:

Regarding Protocol Article  3.3 (afforestation, deforestation, reforestation) and 3.4  (additional activities), the G-77/China introduced draft  paragraphs in the Article 7 guidelines requiring Parties to submit  information on how reporting on these activities takes into  account the LULUCF Principles contained in the Bonn Agreements.  Australia cautioned that the draft guideline text had become more  detailed than the Agreements and stressed that details should be  left to be defined in the IPCC good practice guidance.

After extensive discussion, including compromise proposals from  several Parties and Chair Dovland, the LULUCF package relating to  the Articles 5, 7 and 8 guidelines was forwarded to ministers for  resolution. During their negotiations, it was agreed as part of  the overall package, that for the purposes of reporting greenhouse  gas inventory information, each Party shall include information on  anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions by sources and removals by  sinks from LULUCF under Article 3.3 and, if elected, under Article  3.4, as elaborated by any good practice guidance in accordance  with relevant COP/MOP decisions on LULUCF. Estimates for sinks  shall include, inter alia, information on how inventory  methodologies have been applied, taking into account any IPCC good  practice guidance on LULUCF agreed by the COP and the Principles  on LULUCF, as well as information to ensure that units of land and  areas of land are identifiable. Information should also be  provided to indicate whether indirect human-induced effects are  factored out, and, for Article 3.3 and 3.4 activities,  respectively, how their determining features from the Protocol,  including the 'since 1990' clause, are demonstrated.

###     Mechanisms' Eligibility:

On the issue of mechanisms' eligibility,  Japan proposed text for an expedited procedure to review the  reinstatement of eligibility to use mechanisms, stressing this as  an issue of key importance to the country. Several Parties  expressed concern at the lack of time to consider the issue.  Decision text was agreed following minor amendments.

On loss of mechanisms' eligibility due to reporting failures,  Parties agreed on an EU package proposal including loss of  eligibility triggered by: failure to submit an inventory; and  exceeding specific Annex A source category thresholds. Regarding  reporting on LULUCF, ministers agreed on a compromise by  requesting SBSTA to develop criteria for failure to submit  information on activities under Article 3.3 and 3.4, similar to  the criteria related to Annex A source categories, following work  on good practice for LULUCF with a view to recommending a COP/MOP- 1 decision.

###     Supplementarity:

Regarding supplementarity in the use of  mechanisms, delegates disagreed over whether providing such  information should be mandatory. China introduced a proposal  specifying the aim of reducing per capita emissions differences  between developed and developing countries. The US, supported by  Canada, opposed translating preambular text from the Bonn  Agreements into an operational paragraph. The EU noted problems  with such reporting, including lack of relevant developing country  data. Ministers decided to drop this paragraph and agreed that  Parties 'shall' report on supplementarity. However they agreed  that reporting failures would not trigger loss of mechanisms'  eligibility.

###     Adverse Effects:

Regarding Protocol Article 3.14 (adverse  effects), Chair Dovland noted that the options involve whether or  not reporting problems should lead to non-compliance and loss of  mechanisms' eligibility. Japan, with a number of other Annex I  Parties and opposed by the G-77/China, indicated that he did not  consider reporting under Article 3.14 to be mandatory, and could  not accept a link to mechanisms' eligibility. Following completion  of negotiations on compliance, and the decision that Article 3.14  questions of implementation are to be addressed by the  facilitative branch, Chair Dovland made a proposal regarding all  issues related to Article 3.14 whereby reporting problems would  not trigger loss of mechanisms' eligibility. Japan, Australia and  Canada expressed concern with suggested mandatory language on  reporting of Article 3.14 implementation. Participants were unable  to agree on the proposal and the issue was deferred to ministers,  who agreed on mandatory reporting requirements not triggering loss  of mechanisms' eligibility.

###     COP Decisions:

The COP adopted four decisions related to  guidelines for national systems under Article 5.1, good practice  guidance and adjustments under Article 5.2, guidelines for Article  7 and guidelines for Article 8. The decisions include draft  COP/MOP-1 decisions and, with the exception of Article 5.2,  annexed draft guidelines.

The decision on Article 5.1 (FCCC/CP/2001/L.18) recommends that  COP/MOP-1 adopt the annexed guidelines, and encourages Parties to  implement them as soon as possible to gain experience and to  assist Parties with economies in transition in their guidelines  implementation.

The decision on Article 5.2 (FCCC/CP/2001/L.19) requests the  Secretariat to organize a workshop prior to SBSTA-16 to elaborate  draft technical guidance on methodologies for adjustments. It also  requests SBSTA to complete the technical guidance for  consideration at COP-9, and decides to develop such guidance for  the LULUCF sector, following relevant IPCC work, for consideration  at COP-10.

The decision on Article 7 (FCCC/CP/2001/L.28):requests SBSTA to develop criteria for failure to submit  information on activities under Article 3.3 and 3.4, similar to  the criteria related to Annex A source categories, following work  on good practice for LULUCF; requests SBSTA-16 to further elaborate the sections on  information on assigned amounts and information on national  registries (contained in an appendix to the decision), taking into  account the COP decision on Article 7.4 (assigned amounts); and urges Parties to report by 1 January 2006, for the purpose of  review of demonstrable progress by 2005, and requests SBSTA-16 to  consider the issue further with a view to recommending a COP-8  decision.

The decision on Article 8 (FCCC/CP/2001/L.29):requests SBSTA-17 to elaborate on ways to ensure the  competence of expert review teams (ERTs) and invites Parties to  submit views on this matter; requests SBSTA-17 to elaborate terms of service for ERT lead  reviewers, and invites Parties to submit views and the Secretariat  to prepare a document on terms of service options; requests SBSTA-17 to consider options for the treatment of  confidential data and the Secretariat to prepare an analysis of  such practices of other international treaty bodies, and invites  Parties to submit their views; decides that there shall be an expedited procedure for the  review for reinstatement of mechanisms' eligibility and invites  Parties to submit views in this regard, considering elements  contained in an appendix to the decision; requests SBSTA-16 to further elaborate Parts III and V of the  guidelines on review of information on assigned amounts and on  national registries (as contained in an appendix to the decision)  as well as any additional issues decided by SBSTA; and requests SBSTA-16 to elaborate the procedures, timing and  reporting for the reinstatement of mechanisms' eligibility,  considering the decision on Article 7.4.

###     Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry:

During the High-Level  Segment, ministers considered and the COP adopted a proposal by  the Russian Federation. According to the decision  (FCCC/CP/2001/L.30), the COP agrees that the assigned amount for  the Russian Federation from forest management activities under  Protocol Article 3.4 shall not exceed 33 megatons of carbon per  year, times five. On a related matter, the COP took note of a  letter from Croatia on a unit for forest management under Article  3.4 and requested that this be considered at SB-16.

###     Mechanisms:

Delegates met from 30 October - 6 November in a  negotiating group co-chaired by Raúl Estrada-Oyuela (Argentina)  and Kok Kee Chow (Malaysia). The group met to consider key  political and technical issues outstanding from the Bonn  Agreements relating to Article 6 (joint implementation), Article  12 (CDM), Article 17 (emissions trading), and Article 7.4  (assigned amounts). The crunch issues that cut across modalities  and rules for the mechanisms and Article 7.4 included: the  linkages between compliance and mechanisms' eligibility; inventory  reporting and mechanisms' eligibility; fungibility and banking of  units; and Principles on sinks and the CDM. The negotiating group  relied on a Co-Chairs' non-paper on issues relating to the  procedures of the mechanisms, followed by a new draft text  integrating mechanisms with regional groups' positions on Article  7.4. From 7-10 November, extensive high-level bilateral and  multilateral negotiations were held to broker a deal on these  outstanding issues, which remained unresolved until early Saturday  morning, 10 November, when a final 'package deal' on mechanisms  was agreed.

###     Joint Implementation:

During Article 6 negotiations, the EU,  Umbrella Group and G-77/China put forward divergent positions on  issues relating to:the criteria for baselines and monitoring; accreditation and verification procedures; Supervisory Committee responsibilities, composition, election  of Chair and Vice-Chair, decision-making, and the coverage of  costs of participation of members from developing country Parties; eligibility requirements relating to the procedures and  mechanisms on compliance; the early start of projects, and their eligibility for  emission reduction units (ERUs) as of 2008; and administrative costs.

All these issues were forwarded to ministers for consideration,  and resolved during negotiations held from 7-10 November.

###     Clean Development Mechanism:

Before the High-Level Segment,  Parties reached agreement on standards for the accreditation of  CDM operational entities and an EU proposal on developing, prior  to SBSTA-16, definitions and modalities for including  afforestation and reforestation under the CDM. However, many  unresolved issues remained with divergence emerging on the  eligibility requirements for the CDM. The Umbrella Group expressed  concern with the suggested linkage between compliance and  eligibility to participate in the mechanisms, and requested that  the text remain bracketed as in the COP-6 Part II report. Co-Chair  Estrada said the text used by the Co-Chairs was taken directly  from the Bonn Agreements and that the ministers' decision should  be maintained. Canada highlighted inconsistencies in the Bonn  Agreements described by COP-6 President Pronk as a 'clash' between  the purpose of text on the mechanisms and the text on compliance.  On issues relating to the Annex on modalities and procedures for  the CDM, Parties considered registry requirements for the issuance  of certified emission reduction units (CERs) into the pending  accounts. Parties adopted draft text under the provision that they  could revisit the matter after consideration of Article 7.4.

On the draft COP decision on principles, nature and scope of the  mechanisms, Canada and Japan, opposed by the EU, G-77/China and  the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS), proposed deleting  text emphasizing that environmental integrity is to be achieved  through sound modalities, rules and guidelines for the mechanisms,  strict principles and rules governing LULUCF, and a strong  compliance regime. After some discussion, the original text was  retained, with reference to 'strict' being replaced with 'sound  and strong.' On consideration of the related draft COP/MOP  decision, Co-Chair Chow suggested deleting a paragraph specifying  that the provisions on the use of mechanisms shall apply  individually for Parties acting under Article 4 (joint  fulfillment), on the understanding that in Bonn the flexibility on  supplementarity was given to some countries in exchange for the  deletion of text on Article 4. Australia, Canada and Japan opposed  the deletion, arguing, inter alia, that broader issues of  transparency and good governance were involved. These matters were  negotiated and resolved by ministers in talks held from 7-10  November.

###     Emissions Trading:

During Article 17 negotiations, Parties failed  to reach agreement on several elements relating to the commitment  period reserve, including whether to consider ERUs and CERs for  the first commitment period. The Umbrella Group said that Parties,  upon establishment of their assigned amount and until expiration  of the additional period for fulfilling commitments, 'should' not  make a transfer resulting in these holdings falling below the  required commitment period reserve level. The EU, G-77/China,  AOSIS and Switzerland supported the use of 'shall.' Switzerland  noted the need for mandatory requirements to maintain the  integrity of the Bonn Agreements. The issue was forwarded to  ministers, and resolved during negotiations held from 7-10  November.

###     Assigned Amounts:

On assigned amounts, a Co-Chairs' non-paper on  modalities and guidelines on the Article 7.4 prepared following  the submission of Parties' proposals was considered by Parties in  a drafting group chaired by Murray Ward (New Zealand). Co-Chair  Estrada emphasized that the non-paper sought to achieve acceptable  compromises on areas of divergence, including removal units  (RMUs), fungibility, bankability, carry-over and eligibility  requirements. The G-77/China expressed a willingness to work on  the basis of the non-paper, while noting insufficient time to  consider it in detail.

Starting on Tuesday, 6 November, the Co-Chairs held bilateral  informal consultations in order to produce a new text on  mechanisms that would be acceptable to all Parties. During these  consultations, progress was reported on issues relating to the  commitment period reserve, the transaction log, and definition of  units, including RMUs. The significant areas of divergence were  still unresolved, including bankability, carry-over and  eligibility requirements. Parties agreed to forward the new Co- Chairs' text on mechanisms to higher-level consultations, on the  understanding that several countries had not agreed to the draft  text.

Secretary of State Philippe Roch (Switzerland) and Minister Valli  Moosa (South Africa) facilitated consultations with regional  groups on the mechanisms group Co-Chairs' cross cutting non-paper  on 8 and 9 November. By 9 November, Parties had narrowed down key  issues on eligibility in relation to the compliance regime and the  mechanisms, the reporting of LULUCF data or inventories and the  mechanisms, requirement for the commitment period reserve, and  carry over, bankability and fungibility of credits with the  Umbrella Group rejecting a potential package deal prepared by the  co-facilitators. A compromise solution accommodating some of the  Umbrella Group's positions was finally agreed on 10 November.

###     COP Decisions and Conclusions:

A final package deal on mechanisms  and Article 7.4 was brokered on 10 November with Parties adopting  decisions on the work programme on the mechanisms, principles,  nature and scope of the mechanisms (FCCC/CP/2001/L.24) deciding,  inter alia, that: the eligibility of Annex I Parties to  participate in the mechanisms shall be dependent on its compliance  with methodological and reporting requirements under Protocol  Articles 5.1, 5.2, 7.1 (inventories) and 7.4, in accordance with  the relevant provisions; and its being subject to the procedures  and mechanisms on compliance under the Protocol. The COP also  adopted the guidelines for the implementation of Article 6  (FCCC/CP/2001/L.24/Add.1), the modalities and procedures for a  clean development mechanism (FCCC/CP/2001/L.24/Add.2), and  modalities and guidelines for emissions trading  (FCCC/CP/2001/L.24/Add.3).

The COP also adopted the decision on the modalities for accounting  of assigned amounts under Article 7.4. (FCCC/CP/2001/L.25):  requesting that SBSTA develop technical standards for the purpose  of ensuring the accurate and efficient exchange of data between  national registries, the CDM registry, and the transaction log  with a view to establishing the transaction log no later than the  second session of the COP/MOP; and deciding that each Annex I  Party shall submit to the Secretariat reports on the calculations  of assigned amounts pursuant to Article 3.7 (assigned amount) and  3.8 (base year for other greenhouse gases), on the ERUs, CERs,  assigned amount units (AAUs) and removal units (RMUs) that are  valid for an additional commitment period, and for the publication  of annual and final compilation and accounting of emissions for  Annex I Parties.

On a related mechanisms matter, COP-7 also elected the CDM  Executive Board.

###     Compliance:

Outstanding issues on compliance were discussed in a  negotiating group as well as a closed drafting group under the Co- Chairship of Tuiloma Neroni Slade (Samoa) and Harald Dovland  (Norway), on the basis of a Co-Chairs' non-paper on the status of  negotiation on procedures and mechanisms relating to compliance  under the Protocol. The negotiating group met on 30 and 31 October  and 6 November, while the drafting group met from 1 to 6 November.  In addition, delegates convened in a series of bilateral informal  consultations between regional groups in order to address a number  of these issues, as well as on consultations on the draft COP-7  decision facilitated by Everton Vargas (Brazil). On 6 November, a  package deal between the EU and the Umbrella Group formed the  basis for general agreement to be reached among all Parties. Later  that day, the success achieved was reported by the Co-Chairs to  Plenary. The decision, including the annex containing the  procedures and mechanisms relating to compliance under the  Protocol, was adopted by the COP on 9 November.

The following summary provides a synthesis of compliance  negotiations, focusing on the most controversial issues delegates  had to face: the COP decision and the elements of the package deal  struck between the EU and the Umbrella Group.

Discussions on the COP decision reflected the disagreement among  Parties over the legal nature of consequences applied by the  enforcement branch. For the G-77/China, ministers in Bonn had  agreed on binding consequences, with the only issue deferred to  COP/MOP-1 being the mode of adoption. The EU said consensus at the  ministerial level had been on a need for a binding compliance  system applicable to all Parties, and with binding consequences.  What was left open, and deferred to COP/MOP-1, was whether the  consequences would be legally binding on Parties as a matter of  international law, and this would depend on the mode of adoption  chosen by the Parties to the Protocol. Canada, with Australia and  the Russian Federation, said the issue of legally binding  consequences had been deferred to COP/MOP-1. Several alternative  texts to the Co-Chairs' proposal were put forward by the EU and  Umbrella Group, and discussed in the drafting group as well as in  informal consultations. The compromise text proposed by Vargas,  and agreed on 6 November, includes a preambular paragraph 'noting  that it is the prerogative of the COP/MOP to decide on the legal  form of the procedures and mechanisms relating to compliance.' The elements of the package deal struck between the EU and the  Umbrella Group focused on four issues: Party-to-Party trigger,  appeal, reinstatement of eligibility and compliance action plan.  The need for a process leading to the reinstatement of eligibility  to use the mechanisms was advocated by Japan, both within the  context of the mandate of the enforcement branch and the  provisions on its expedited procedure. The agreed text on  procedures and mechanisms relating to compliance provides for two  processes leading to the possible reinstatement of eligibility.  The first pertains to circumstances where eligibility is suspended  due to the lack of meeting eligibility requirements. The second  concerns cases where the suspension of eligibility to make  transfers under Article 17 results from a Party exceeding its  assigned amount. In the final deal, it was agreed that both  processes could be triggered through ERT reports, as well as  directly by the Party concerned.

The possibility for the Compliance Committee to receive questions  of implementation submitted by a Party with respect to another  Party was supported by the G-77/China and EU, and opposed by  Australia and the Russian Federation. Arguments put forward by  these countries were that a Party-to-Party trigger had the  potential of creating rifts among Parties or could eventually be  used by a Party for other purposes, and that the ERT reports  provided a thorough triggering process. In the package deal,  Parties agreed to maintain the Party-to-Party trigger.

One element of the proposed text on appeal was opposed by  Australia, who suggested that the decision of the enforcement  branch become effective if an appeal is not made. The EU, on the  other hand, proposed that decisions stand pending the outcome of  an appeal. Parties reached agreement on text providing that both  the decision of the enforcement branch shall stand pending the  decision on appeal, and that it shall become effective if, after  45 days, no appeal has been made against it.

The section on consequences applied by the enforcement branch, in  particular that related to the development of a compliance action  plan in cases of non-compliance with Articles 5.1, 5.2, 7.1, and  7.4, also constituted one element of the EU-Umbrella Group package  deal. Japan expressed difficulties with the concept of a  compliance action plan, while Canada said it had concerns with  text providing that 'further consequences' may be decided by the  enforcement branch. The package deal gives Parties more  flexibility with regard to the deadline for the submission of a  compliance action plan and the timing for the submission of  progress reports, and no longer provides for the possibility for  further consequences to be decided by the enforcement branch.

Concerning other controversial issues discussed at COP-7, Parties  decided that:questions of implementation relating to Article 3.14 (adverse  effects) as well as with respect to supplementarity in the use of  mechanisms fall within the scope of the mandate of the  facilitative branch; the Compliance Committee is to take into account any 'degree  of flexibility' for EITs, and these countries may, like any other  Party, benefit from the facilitation of financial and technical  assistance; in exercising its responsibilities, the facilitative branch  shall take into account the principle of common but differentiated  responsibilities and respective capabilities, and also the  circumstances of the case before it; hearings by the enforcement branch shall be public and  information considered by either the enforcement or the  facilitative branch shall be made public, unless decided otherwise  by that branch; and the length of the additional period for fulfilling  commitments is 100 days.

The COP decision, including the annex on procedures and mechanisms  relating to compliance under the Protocol was adopted in Plenary  on 9 November.

###     COP Decision:

The decision (FCCC/CP/2001/L.21):notes that it is the prerogative of the COP/MOP to decide on  the legal form of the procedures and mechanisms relating to  compliance; adopts the procedures and mechanisms relating to compliance  annexed thereto; and recommends that the COP/MOP-1 adopts these in terms of  Article 18.

The annex provides that:a Compliance Committee is established and functions through a  facilitative and an enforcement branch; the facilitative branch is responsible for providing advice  and facilitation to any Party, through the facilitation of  financial and technical assistance, or the formulation of  recommendations; the enforcement branch is responsible for determining whether  an Annex I Party is in compliance with Article 3.1 (assigned  amount), methodological and reporting requirements under Articles  5.1, 5.2, 7.1 and 7.2, and the mechanisms eligibility  requirements; and, consequences applicable by the enforcement branch include:  declaration of non-compliance; submission of a compliance action  plan; deduction from the Party's assigned amount of the second  commitment period of a number of tonnes equal to 1.3 times the  amount, in tonnes, of excess emissions; and suspension of  eligibility to use the mechanisms.

###     Policies and Measures:

In the SBSTA meeting on 30 October, Chair  Dovland noted the recent workshop on P&Ms, suggested that in-depth  discussions on this issue be deferred to SBSTA-16, and said he  would produce draft conclusions.

The conclusions were presented to SBSTA on 6 November. Saudi  Arabia, opposed by Poland, Switzerland, Central African Republic  and Canada, advocated deleting the paragraph inviting Parties to  consider and submit their views on the workshop, and on further  action to advance work on P&Ms. Following discussion, Dovland's  proposed conclusions were approved and forwarded to the COP, which  adopted them during its final Plenary on 10 November.

###     Conclusions:

In the conclusions (FCCC/CP/2001/5/Add.2), the SBSTA  takes note of a recent workshop on P&Ms, decides to further  consider the issue at SBSTA-16 and invites Parties to submit their  views in this regard, and requests the Secretariat to compile  information on P&Ms from Parties national communications for  consideration at SBSTA-17.

## INPUT TO THE WORLD SUMMIT ON SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

Informal consultations on this matter, facilitated by Amb. Bo  Kjellén (Sweden), took place throughout the meeting. On 2  November, delegates in the COP Plenary stressed: the principle of  common but differentiated responsibilities; the importance of the  'three pillars' of sustainable development; linkages between  UNFCCC, Convention to Combat Desertification (CCD) and the  Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD); and the opportunity  offered by the WSSD to consider progress made since UNCED in 1992.  A paper containing discussion elements for the COP's contribution  to the WSSD was distributed later that day. During the High-Level  Segment, consultations on a Marrakesh draft ministerial  declaration were facilitated by Minister Valli Mossa (South  Africa) and Philippe Roch (Switzerland). The text of a Marrakesh  Ministerial Declaration was submitted on 8 November, as one of the  four elements of a global package deal to be agreed upon at COP-7.  All regional groups reportedly agreed to the proposal, which was  adopted by the COP on 10 November.

### MARRAKESH DECLARATION

In the Marrakesh Ministerial Declaration  (FCCC/CP/2001/L.27), ministers and other heads of delegation,  inter alia:welcome the Marrakesh Accords that pave the way for the  timely entry into force of the Protocol; recognize that the synergies between the UNFCCC, CCD and CBD  should continue to be explored; stress the importance of capacity building; emphasize that climate change and its adverse impacts have to  be addressed through cooperation at all levels; and welcome the efforts of all Parties to implement the  Convention.

## THIRD ASSESSMENT REPORT OF THE IPCC

At the SBSTA meeting on 29 October, IPCC Chair Bob Watson  introduced the Synthesis Report of the Third Assessment Report  (TAR), and delegates considered the implications of the TAR for  the future work of the SBSTA. The EU, supported by Japan, Canada,  Malaysia, AOSIS, Norway, Switzerland and Australia, but opposed by  Saudi Arabia, suggested holding a workshop on the implications of  the TAR for the work of the SBSTA. Saudi Arabia and the G-77/China  stressed the inclusion of developing country scientists, and  literature in languages other than English. Chair Dovland invited  Halldor Thorgeirsson (Iceland) to conduct informal consultations  on a draft decision on the TAR.

On Tuesday, 6 November, Thorgeirsson reported that while a large  group of Parties supported steps on follow-up on the TAR,  delegates had been unable to reach consensus on the proposed draft  conclusions. Saudi Arabia and Kuwait proposed deferring the issue  to SBSTA-16. Following additional informal consultations,  compromise text was agreed and adopted by the SBSTA. References to  assessing 'the implications' of the TAR were deleted, and the  scope of the proposed workshop on the TAR was amended to include  reference to 'scientific uncertainty' and the 'effects of  measures.' A decision was adopted by the COP Plenary on Friday, 9  November.

###     COP Decision:

In this decision (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.17/Add.1), the  COP encourages continuing IPCC work, including preparation of the  Fourth Assessment Report, and also encourages Parties to make full  use of the information in the TAR. It urges Parties to continue  providing financial support to the IPCC and to contribute to the  IPCC trust fund to allow more developing country experts to  participate in IPCC activities.

## REPORT OF THE GEF

The report of the Global Environment Facility prepared for COP-7  was referred by the COP to the SBI, which first took up the matter  on 30 October. Commenting in the SBI on the report, the G-77/China  highlighted concerns over the length of time between project  approval and availability of funds, the impact of currency  fluctuations, and the need for adequate funding for support  programmes. Draft conclusions were subsequently prepared by SBI  Chair John Ashe. On 6 November, the SBI approved these draft  conclusions and forwarded them to the COP, which adopted them on  Friday night, 9 November.

### CONCLUSIONS

The SBI Chair's conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2001/L.7) take  note of the GEF report, and urge the GEF to streamline its  procedures to reduce the time between project approval and  disbursement of funds. The conclusions urge GEF financial support  to non-Annex I Parties for second national communications,  dissemination of the IPCC Third Assessment Report, and  implementation of UNFCCC Article 6 (education, training and public  awareness). In addition, the conclusions note some Parties'  concerns regarding adequacy of GEF assistance for preparation of  non-Annex I communications.

## PROPOSALS TO AMEND THE LISTS IN UNFCCC ANNEXES I AND II

### PROPOSAL BY TURKEY

A proposal made by Turkey at COP-6 Part I to  remove its name from the list in Annex II to the Convention was  adopted by the COP Plenary on 9 November, following consideration  by the SBI. The decision (FCCC/SBI/2001/L.8) notes that the entry  into force of this amendment to the list in UNFCCC Annex II shall  be subject to the same procedure as that for the entry into force  of annexes to the UNFCCC in accordance with Article 16.3 (entry  into force of the adoption of an Annex), and invites Parties to  recognize the special circumstances of Turkey, which place it,  after becoming a Party, in a situation different from that of the  other Parties included in UNFCCC Annex I.

### PROPOSAL BY KAZAKHSTAN

A proposal by Kazakhstan to add its name  to the list in Annex I was taken up in the SBI and adopted by the  COP on 9 November. The conclusions note that, in accordance with  UNFCCC 4.2 (a) and (b) (P&Ms), Kazakhstan becomes an Annex I Party  to the Protocol upon its ratification and the entry into force of  the Protocol. They also note Kazakhstan's interest in engaging in  negotiations with the objective of defining a quantified  limitation or reductions commitment under Annex B of the Protocol,  and recognize that it will continue to be a Party not included in  Annex I for the purposes of the UNFCCC.

## NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS

### ANNEX I COMMUNICATIONS

Three sub-issues were addressed under  this agenda item: feasibility of developing guidelines for the  review of national communications; third national communications,  review and roster of experts; and reporting and review of  greenhouse gas inventories in Annex I Parties.

###     Feasibility of developing guidelines for the review of national  communications:

Delegates agreed to a proposal by SBI Chair Ashe  that this issue be considered after the review of third national  communications. Conclusions were adopted and are contained in the  report of the SBI (FCCC/SBI/2001/L.2). The conclusions take note  of a workshop report on exchanging information on preparation of  third national communications, and note that the SBI will return  to this issue at a future session.

###     Review and roster of experts in relation to third national  communications:

Chair Ashe noted that these communications are due  by 30 November 2001. The decision (FCCC/SBI/2001/L.5), adopted by  the COP on 9 November, requests the Secretariat to prepare the  compilation and synthesis of national communications at COP-8.

###     Reporting and review of greenhouse gas inventories in Annex I  Parties:

SBSTA took up the matter of Annex I Party inventories on  30 October. Chair Dovland recalled the SBSTA-12 invitation for  Annex I submissions of experiences in preparing greenhouse gas  inventories using IPCC good practice guidance. Noting that an  inventory review expert meeting is to take place in December 2001,  he proposed deferring evaluation of experiences to SBSTA-16. The  decision on this matter (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.9/Add.1) was adopted by  the COP on Friday, 9 November. In the decision, the COP defers the  revision of the guidelines for the technical review of greenhouse  gas inventories for consideration by SBSTA-16 and extends the  trial period for their assessment until COP-8.

### NON-ANNEX I COMMUNICATIONS

Regarding non-Annex I communications,  Parties considered the third compilation and synthesis of initial  communications; the report of the Consultative Group of Experts  (CGE); and the provision of financial and technical support. Three  decisions and one set of conclusions were adopted by the SBI and  the COP on this item. The conclusions on the provision of  financial and technical support were only considered by the SBI,  and are summarized in the SBI section.

###     National communications:

The decision on this agenda item was  adopted by the SBI on 8 November and by the COP on 9 November. The  decision on third compilation and synthesis of initial national  communications from non-Annex I Parties (FCCC/SBI/2001/L.4)  requests the Secretariat to prepare a fourth compilation and  synthesis report for COP-8; concludes that non-Annex I Parties are  fulfilling their commitments under UNFCCC Article 4.1  (communication of information); and notes the constraints and  limitations encountered during the preparation of national  communications.

###     Consultative Group of Experts:

Two draft decisions and one set of  draft conclusions on this item were considered by the SBI and a  contact group chaired by Emily Ojoo-Massawa (Kenya) and in  informal consultations. Following their approval in the SBI, all  three texts were adopted by the COP on 9 November.

In the first SBI discussion on this matter, the US proposed that  recommendations from the CGE be considered as a basis for  improvements of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines. On the report of  the CGE, Canada, with Australia, noted that there might be overlap  between the report and the COP-6 Part II funding package,  suggesting they be harmonized. The EU and Australia, opposed by  Malaysia, China and Argentina, said the report provided a sound  basis to initiate the revised guidelines. SBI Chair Ashe said this  issue would be further considered in a contact group, along with  the provision of financial and technical support.

In the contact group, Parties discussed the terms of reference for  the CGE, in particular language in the document referring to LDCs.  Several LDCs noted that the CGE did not have a mandate to address  the LDC NAPA process. The EU stressed linkages between the  processes of preparing national communications and NAPAs. Text  referring to LDCs was bracketed and remained so until agreement on  linkages was reached between LDCs and the CGE within the group  discussing LDC issues.

On the composition of the CGE, the G-77/China requested removal of  the expert from non-Annex I Parties in Europe proposed in the new  terms of reference. The EU, Switzerland and Australia supported  the initial composition, and Switzerland and Australia said  further consideration of the terms of reference was not necessary.

On the improvement of guidelines for the preparation of non-Annex  I communications, several Parties supported the extension of the  current terms of reference, although consensus was not achieved.  Delegates addressed at length the timing for three issues: the  improvement and adoption of the guidelines; the preparation of  draft improved guidelines and a workshop to be held on this; and  the submission by Parties of proposals on the draft guidelines to  the Secretariat. Uganda, for the LDCs, supported adopting the  improved guidelines at COP-10, while the G-77/China preferred COP- 9. The US, with Australia, supported doing this at COP-8,  underscoring the relevant COP-5 decision that had scheduled this  for COP-7, and stressed that it was not acceptable to postpone  this for more than one year. Parties agreed to the adoption of the  improved guidelines at COP-8, the holding of a workshop prior to  SB-16, and the submission of Parties' proposals on these  guidelines by 5 August 2002 for consideration at SBI-17. The US  did not support deciding at COP-7 on the frequency of submission  of national communications by non-LDC developing country Parties.

On the terms of reference, participants discussed: the cut-off  time for reviewing national communications and for inclusion in  the Secretariat's compilation and synthesis report; the number of  workshops to be held; and the number of experts to be invited to  these workshops. Regarding dates for workshops, and the review of  the terms of reference for the CGE, the G-77/China proposed two  workshops be held in 2002, and that the terms of reference be  reviewed at COP-8, to which delegates agreed.

###     CGE Decisions and Conclusions:

The conclusions on the report of  the CGE (FCCC/SBI/2001/CRP.4) note the excellent work of the CGE  and recommend two draft decisions that were adopted by the COP.

The decision on the report of the CGE on other matters relating to  communications from non-Annex I Parties (FCCC/CP/2001/L.20) states  that: the process of reviewing the guidelines for the preparation  of national communications should be continued with a view to  improving these at COP-8; and that the improvement of guidelines  shall take into account information on the use of guidelines  contained in third compilation and synthesis report, national  communications, and recommendations by the CGE. It also decides  that the Secretariat shall prepare draft guidelines on the  preparation of national communications, invites Parties to submit  proposals on the matter by 5 August 2002, and requests the  Secretariat to prepare an information document on Parties' views  for consideration by SB-17.

The decision on the CGE (FCCC/SBI/2001/L.10/Rev.1) states that at  least one member of the CGE from LDCs and at least one member of  the CGE from an Annex II Party should also be members of the LDC  Expert Group, in order to establish linkage on issues related to  adaptation; that the CGE shall conduct two workshops in 2002; that  during 2002 the Secretariat shall organize a meeting of the LDC  Expert Group back to back with a meeting of the CGE; and that the  terms of reference of the CGE shall be reviewed at COP-8.

## PROGRAMME BUDGET FOR THE BIENNIUM 2002-2003

This matter was referred by the COP to the SBI, which first took  up the matter on Monday, 29 October. UNFCCC Executive Secretary  Cutajar introduced the revised UNFCCC programme budget, produced  following SBI's recommendation at SB-14 of a budget for 2002-2003  of US$32.8 million. Consultations were held on the draft decision  and adopted by the SBI on 8 November and by the COP on 9 November,  with an amendment inviting Parties to make contributions in the  order of US$6.8 million rather than US$6.5 million to support  activities relating to 'prompt start' of the CDM. The decision  (FCCC/CP/2001/L.3) approves the programme budget of US$32,837,100  and approves a contingency budget for conference servicing of  US$5,661,800.

## OTHER MATTERS

### LETTER FROM THE CENTRAL ASIA, CAUCASUS, ALBANIA AND MOLDOVA GROUP  OF COUNTRIES (CAC&M GROUP) ON THEIR STATUS UNDER THE CONVENTION

This agenda item, based on a letter stating that the CAC&M group  considers COP-6 and COP-7 decisions relating to developing  countries should also apply to members of the group, was taken up  by the COP on Monday, 29 October, and referred to informal  consultations. On Friday, 2 November, the COP adopted a decision  (FCCC/CP/2001/L.17) inviting SBI-16 to give further consideration  to the request and to make recommendations to the COP.

### PARTICIPATION OF WOMEN

On Friday, 9 November, the COP adopted by  acclamation a draft decision (FCCC/CP/2001/L.22) proposed by COP-7  President Elyazghi on improving the participation of women in the  representation of Parties in bodies established under the UNFCCC  and its Protocol. The decision invites Parties to give active  consideration to the nomination of women for elective posts in any  body established under the UNFCCC and the Protocol; requests the  Secretariat to bring this decision to the attention of Parties  whenever a vacancy arises for any elective post in any body  established under the UNFCCC and the Protocol; and further  requests the Secretariat to maintain information on the gender  composition of each body with elective posts established under the  UNFCCC and the Protocol, and to bring this information to the  attention of Parties whenever such a vacancy occurs.

## REPORTS OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES

The subsidiary bodies to the UNFCCC met for their fifteenth  sessions from 29 October - 8 November. On Monday, 29 October, the  Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) and the Subsidiary Body  for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) met separately to  begin their work by addressing most of their agenda items. These  meetings were followed by a number of informal consultations over  the next week, which resulted in draft conclusions adopted by the  two subsidiary bodies in meetings held on Tuesday, 6 November, and  Thursday, 8 November. Issues addressed include, for the SBI, the  programme budget for 2002-2003 and national communications, and,  for SBSTA, methodological issues, technology transfer, and  education, awareness and training. SBSTA adopted its report for  the session (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.6) on 6 November, while the SBI  adopted its report (FCCC/SBI/2001/L.2) on 8 November. The  following section outlines issues addressed by these two bodies  that the COP did not specifically address or take a separate  decision on.

### SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE (SBSTA)

The fifteenth session of the SBSTA, chaired by Harald Dovland  (Norway), met five times from 29 October - 6 November. On 29  October, delegates adopted the agenda and agreed on its  organization of work. On 6 November, following consultations,  delegates elected Philip Weech (the Bahamas) as SBSTA Vice-Chair  and Tatyana Ososkova (Uzbekistan) as SBSTA Rapporteur.

During the COP Plenary on 9 November, Chair Dovland reported on  the work of SBSTA-15. He listed the issues on which SBSTA had  adopted draft conclusions and submitted, for the consideration of  the COP, the draft report of SBSTA-15 (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.6) and  the report of SBSTA-14 (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.2).

###     Methodological Issues:

Bunker Fuels: This issue was considered on  Tuesday, 30 October. The EU reiterated concerns about increasing  greenhouse gas emissions from international aviation and called  for guidelines compatible with the Protocol for emissions  allocation methodologies. He urged the International Maritime  Organization (IMO) to work on emissions reductions activities.  Switzerland proposed that the International Civil Aviation  Organization (ICAO) Council continue initiatives on guidelines on  emissions reductions. The G-77/China proposed that work take place  within the framework of Protocol Article 2.2, which stipulates  that Annex I Parties shall limit emissions from aviation and  marine bunker fuels, working through the ICAO and IMO. Informal  consultations on this issue were convened by José Romero  (Switzerland). On 6 November, Romero reported that full agreement  had been reached.

The conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.11) note with appreciation an  IPCC presentation on reporting aspects and an ICAO resolution  regarding policies and practices on environmental protection. It  also requests the Secretariat to continue cooperation with ICAO  and IMO, and invites the ICAO, IMO and Secretariat to explore  opportunities for improving the quality of data reporting and  comparability.

###     Methods and tools to evaluate impacts and adaptation:

These issues  were examined on 30 October. Canada proposed that regional  workshops on integrated assessment include consideration of  impacts and adaptation. Malaysia and Thailand proposed joint  research projects between developed and developing countries. The  issues were addressed in informal consultations convened by Pierre  Giroux (Canada) and Martha Yvette Munguia de Aguilar (El  Salvador). The conclusions were adopted on 6 November.

The conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.10) take note of a recent  workshop and Party submissions, notes the need for more scientific  work on development of methodologies to assess impacts and  adaptation, and requests the Secretariat to consult with other UN  bodies and organizations and hold a workshop prior to SBSTA-17.

###     Development of good practice guidance and other information for  the LULUCF sector:

This item was considered on 30 October. IPCC  Chair Bob Watson outlined the future of the IPCC and highlighted  the LULUCF work programme under the IPCC National Greenhouse Gas  Inventory programme. The EU, supported by Indonesia, proposed that  the SBSTA develop terms of reference for IPCC work on CDM  modalities for LULUCF during its current session. The US, Russian  Federation, Canada and Australia cautioned that the draft decision  on LULUCF has yet to be finalized. Tuvalu, for AOSIS, stressed  that issues related to Protocol Articles 5, 7 and 8 need to be  resolved before further guidance is given to the IPCC, and  supported broader consultation. The matter was examined in  informal consultations convened by Margaret Mukahanana-Sangarwe  (Zimbabwe) and Audun Rosland (Norway). SBSTA adopted the  conclusions on 6 November.

In the conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.12), the SBSTA:notes IPCC work progress with regard to LULUCF; welcomes its proposed work programme relating to good  practice guidance, with a separate section for Protocol purposes  containing specific requirements as elaborated in the draft  COP/MOP-1 decision on Article 7; takes note of the IPCC plan to address consistent  representation of land areas; takes note of a proposed IPCC scoping paper on the  development of definitions for direct human-induced degradation  and methodological options for inventorying and reporting in this  regard; takes note of a proposed IPCC scoping paper on development of  methodologies for factoring out direct human-induced carbon stock  changes from changes due to indirect human-induced and natural  effects and effects of past practices; welcomes a workshop organized by FAO, IPCC and the Center for  International Forestry Research on forest-related definitions; and invites the IPCC to report on work progress at its next  session.

###     Issues relating to emissions from forest harvesting and wood  products:

This issue was considered in the SBSTA meeting on 30  October. The EU, supported by AOSIS, China and Saudi Arabia,  opposed the inclusion of harvested wood products (HWP) in the  first commitment period. New Zealand noted slow progress on the  development of technical methodologies and, supported by Japan,  Canada and Malaysia, suggested further technical review. It was  agreed that this issue be examined in the informal discussions on  good practice guidance and other information on LULUCF. On 6  November, SBSTA adopted the conclusions.

In its conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.12), the SBSTA:notes the IPCC intention to include HWP in its development of  good practice guidance; encourages further work on HWP by interested Parties; invites Party submissions for consideration at SBSTA-18; requests the Secretariat to prepare a technical paper on HWP  accounting; and decides to further consider the issue at SBSTA-20 and SBSTA- 21.

###     Cooperation with Relevant International Organizations:

This issue  was considered on Tuesday, 30 October. The Global Climate  Observing System (GCOS) reported on its regional workshop  programme and on a proposal for a second assessment of the  adequacy of observing systems. Several Parties expressed concern  at the deterioration of networks. An informal contact group on  this issue was convened under Sue Barrell (Australia) and Sok  Appadu (Mauritius) and reached agreement on relevant draft  conclusions.

On cooperation with other multilateral environmental agreements,  the IPCC reported on its technical paper on interlinkages between  climate change, biodiversity and desertification, and on the  relevance of the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment to the climate  change process. Presentations were also provided by the CBD, the  CCD, the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands and the World Health  Organization. In the ensuing discussion, Parties stressed  enhancing cooperation between conventions, strengthening such  cooperation at the national level, and furthering the  international environmental governance process. Informal  consultations were convened by Jimena Nieto Carrasco (Colombia)  and Ian Carruthers (Australia) and reached agreement on relevant  draft conclusions.

###     SBSTA Conclusions:

These conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.14),  adopted on 6 November, include sections on cooperation with  scientific organizations, other conventions and UN bodies. Under  cooperation with scientific organizations, the SBSTA welcomes the  GCOS statement and encourages GCOS to continue addressing the  deterioration of the global observation systems. The SBSTA further  notes the holding of regional workshops to identify capacity- building needs, and encourages GCOS to expedite further workshops.

Under cooperation with other conventions, the SBSTA: reaffirms the  need for enhanced cooperation with the CBD and CCD; notes with  appreciation an IPCC technical paper being developed on the  interlinkages between climate change, biodiversity and  desertification; and welcomes cooperation with the Ramsar  Convention. The SBSTA requests a joint liaison group to collect  information on the work programmes and operations of the three  conventions and to examine the possibility of holding a joint  workshop prior to SBSTA-18.

Under cooperation with UN bodies, the SBSTA notes with  appreciation the work of the WHO relating to climate change and  invites it to make more information available at SBSTA-16.

###     Article 6 of the Convention: Education, Training and Public  Awareness:

Delegates addressed this issue on Wednesday, 31  October. Malaysia and China stressed the importance of a concrete  implementation work programme. The US suggested that a workshop be  held on the prioritization of activities and on setting a work  programme. Senegal and Central African Republic called for a  Climate Change Day. China suggested that each Party should focus  on promoting public awareness on the IPCC TAR, and Mauritius said  Article 6 implementation should take place at the grassroots level  in both developed and developing countries. Informal consultations  were convened by Teresa Fogelberg (The Netherlands) and Gladys  Kenabetsho Ramothwa (Botswana). The SBSTA adopted the conclusions  on 6 November.

###     SBSTA Conclusions:

In these conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.13),  the SBSTA:reaffirms the importance of work in this area and invites  Parties to contribute funding; encourages the Secretariat to facilitate cost-effective  information dissemination, and to develop a new website as a  resource center; requests the Secretariat to organize a workshop to develop a  work programme on Article 6 activities, with the terms of  reference attached as an annex; recognizes the need to disseminate the results of the TAR; requests the Secretariat to report on Article 6  implementation based on Annex I Party national communications for  consideration at SBSTA-17; and notes the potential awareness-raising role of a UN Climate  Change Day.

###     Other Matters:

Proposal on cleaner or less greenhouse gas-emitting  energy:

On 31 October, a number of delegates supported Canada's  proposal to hold a workshop to follow-up on a recent meeting in  Calgary on the 'cleaner or less greenhouse gas-emitting energy  trade.'  The matter was referred to informal consultations  convened by Mohammad Barkindo (Nigeria). The SBSTA adopted the  conclusions on 6 November. In the conclusions  (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.19), the SBSTA requests the Secretariat to  organize a workshop on the matter, if possible prior to SBSTA-16,  notes Canada's offer to host the workshop, and invites Parties to  submit views on it.

###     Special circumstances of Croatia under Convention Article 4.6:

On  31 October, Croatia underlined the importance of utilizing UNFCCC  Article 4.6 (flexibility for EITs). On Tuesday, 6 November, SBSTA  adopted conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.8) where SBSTA invites  Parties to send views on this matter by 15 February 2002, requests  the Secretariat to review Croatia's national communication, and  decides to further consider the matter at its sixteenth session.

###     Issues relating to hydrofluorocarbons and perfluorocarbons:

This  issue was considered on 31 October, when the EU suggested it  should be a substantive agenda item at SBSTA-16. Chair Dovland  undertook to develop conclusions based on informal consultations.  On 6 November, SBSTA adopted the conclusions on the matters. These  were amended to provide for China's proposal that only Annex I  Parties be encouraged to update information on means for limiting  such emissions.

In these conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2001/L.16), the SBSTA recalls a  COP-5 decision and requests Annex I Parties and other relevant  entities to update information on ways and means of emissions  limitation, invites Parties' views on information aspects noted in  the COP-5 decision and decides to further consider the issue at  SBSTA-16.

### SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION (SBI)

The fifteenth session of  the SBI met in four Plenary meetings chaired by John Ashe (Antigua  and Barbuda), and adopted its agenda (FCCC/SBI/2001/10) at its  first meeting. Delegates elected Daniela Stoytcheva (Bulgaria) as  SBI Vice-Chair and Emily Ojoo-Massawa (Kenya) as SBI Rapporteur.  The SBI referred several items to contact groups and informal  consultations, as well as to the COP.

###     Matters relating to LDCs:

This issue was taken up by the SBI on  Monday, 29 October, and referred to a contact group chaired by  Sibusiso Gamede (South Africa). Negotiations in this group, and in  a drafting group, resulted in three draft decisions and one set of  draft conclusions, adopted by the SBI on 8 November, and by the  COP on 10 November. Delegates addressed: the establishment of an  LDC Expert Group; support for the preparation of National  Adaptation Programmes of Action (NAPAs); and guidance to the LDC  Fund.

Contentious issues under this agenda item included: whether the  guidance to the Fund should be considered at this or the  subsequent COP; whether there should be explicit linkages between  the LDC Expert Group and NAPA process, and the CGE; the  composition of the LDC Expert Group; and the identity of the  entity operating as a financial mechanism to the LDC Fund.

Under support for the preparation of NAPAs, Malawi introduced a  proposal that delegates examined throughout the negotiations. In a  meeting of the contact group on 31 October, Chair Gamede noted  progress, but said some Parties had proposed enlisting more expert  assistance on the guidelines.

On a draft proposal for a COP decision on the establishment of an  LDC Expert Group, including an annex containing terms of reference  for the group, a number of Annex I Parties raised concerns. The US  and Switzerland noted similar discussions taking place in the CGE  group, and the EU suggested that the groups might be combined at  some point. Several LDCs highlighted the efficiency and value of  an expert group in NAPA preparation and implementation, and  underscored the distinction between the NAPA process and the work  of the CGE.

Guidance to an operating entity of the financial mechanism on the  LDC Fund remained the outstanding issue in consultations towards  the end of the first week. Mali, for the LDCs, underscored a  simplified operating procedure for the Fund, enabling project  approval within four months, and employment of local and regional  expertise. The EU suggested that the legal and technical review  carried out by the Secretariat as a result of delays in the  intergovernmental process had not taken into account the document  on guidance to the Fund and, with the US, Japan, and Norway, said  developing guidance to the Fund should be considered at COP-8.  Chair Gamede requested Parties to consider this informally, and  said that if no agreement was reached, the matter of guidance to  the Fund would be referred to ministers. Consultations continued  until 7 November.

In the final meeting of the contact group, the US stressed a  package deal on all three draft decisions, and said they should  remain bracketed in their entirety when being forwarded to SBI.  All other Parties supported removing the brackets. The draft  conclusions on the status of the implementation of UNFCCC Article  4.9 (LDCs) were agreed with brackets remaining around the  reference to the three other decisions on LDCs, at the request of  the US.

Following further informal consultations prior to formal adoption  by the SBI, the brackets were removed from all documents.  Agreement to remove the brackets was reached in exchange for  inclusion of a paragraph that notes the unique circumstances of  LDCs, and that the establishment of the LDC Expert Group 'does not  set a precedent for the establishment of similar groups for other  categories of countries.'

###     Decisions and Conclusions:

The draft decision on the establishment  of the LDC Expert Group (FCCC/CP/2001/L.26) further outlines the  terms of reference in an annex, defining the group as twelve  experts, of which five from African LDC Parties, two from Asian  LDC Parties, two from LDC SIDS, and three from Annex II Parties.

The draft decision on guidance to the LDC Fund  (FCCC/SBI/2001/L.12) requests the operating entity of the Fund to:  meet the full cost of preparing NAPAs; adopt simplified procedures  and arrange for expedited access to the Fund by LDCs; encourage  the use of national and, where appropriate, regional experts; and  adopt streamlined procedures for the operation of the Fund.

The draft decision on guidelines for the preparation of NAPAs  (FCCC/SBI/2001/L.14) decides to adopt the guidelines included in  an annex, and invites Parties to make submissions with a view to  improving the guidelines for consideration at SBI-17.

Draft conclusions on the assessment of the status of  implementation of UNFCCC Article 4.9 (FCCC/SBI/2001/L.11), adopted  by the SBI on 8 November and by the COP on 10 November, note that  prompt steps needed to be taken to expedite the process of  provision of funding in support of NAPA preparation, and the need  for a further assessment of the status of implementation of  Article 4.9 at COP-9.

###     Financial and Technical Support for non-Annex I Communications:

On  6 November, the SBI adopted draft conclusions  (FCCC/SBI/2001/CRP.3) taking note of progress made by non-Annex I  Parties in the preparation of their national communications and  greenhouse gas abatement projects submitted for funding and  recommending these projects be brought to the attention of the  GEF, and other bilateral and multilateral financing institutions.

###     Administrative and Financial Matters:

Three sub-items were  considered under this agenda item: interim financial performance  for 2000-2001; possible options to respond to late payment of  contributions; and implementation of the Headquarters Agreement.  Delegates adopted a draft decision on the interim financial  performance for 2000-2001 (FCCC/SBI/2001/L.6) on 6 November. The  decision takes note of the interim financial statements as of 31  December 2001, expresses appreciation to Parties that made their  indicative contributions to the core budget in a timely manner,  and expresses concern at the trend toward late payment of  contributions.

On possible options to respond to late payment of contributions,  Chair Ashe and Philip Weech (the Bahamas) held informal  consultations. The informal group considered text outstanding from  SB-12, on problems and inconveniences that could be faced by the  UNFCCC as a result of late payments to the core budget, and  additional options the SBI might wish to consider as a basis for  recommendations to the COP. However, possible options to respond  to late payment of contributions had not been agreed by 6  November, and delegates decided to forward the matter to SBI-16.

On implementation of the Headquarters Agreement, Germany reported  progress on the building of a UN campus, the development of a  congress center and matters relating to Secretariat staff and  their families. Informal consultations were unable to lead to  further progress. Conclusions were adopted, contained in the  report of the session (FCCC/SBI/2001/L.2).

## HIGH-LEVEL SEGMENT

The High-Level Segment took place from 7-8 November, attended by  ministers and other heads of delegation. Participants heard  statements from over 70 Parties as well as from UN bodies and  specialized agencies, observer states, youth representatives,  intergovernmental organizations and NGOs.

### WELCOMING CEREMONY

On Wednesday morning, 7 November, an official  welcoming ceremony for participants at the High-Level Segment was  held. UNEP Executive Director Klaus Töpfer, on behalf of UN  Secretary-General Kofi Annan, highlighted the environment and  development elements of climate change, noted the need for  significant long-term changes in social and economic behaviors,  expressed appreciation for the work of COP-6 President Pronk,  noting that Pronk would serve as his special envoy to the WSSD,  and underlined the importance of multilateralism.

Prince Moulay Rachid of Morocco, speaking on behalf of King  Mohammed VI, underlined the need for internationally-shared  ethical values, and urged international solidarity in addressing  environmental concerns, calling for technology transfer, new and  additional financial resources, and reducing external debt  burdens.

In his final speech in a High-Level Segment, UNFCCC Executive  Secretary Michael Zammit Cutajar congratulated the Secretariat  staff on their dynamism and commitment, and thanked Parties for  their trust and for not engaging in micro-management. He wished  delegates well in moving the UNFCCC forward. Delegates thanked him  for his contribution with a standing ovation.

### STATEMENTS BY PARTIES

In their statements, many Parties  highlighted the importance of maintaining the environmental  integrity of the Protocol. They also drew attention to success in  the negotiations on compliance, and called for completion at COP-7  of work under the BAPA, with many stating that this would support  ratification and entry into force in time for the WSSD in  September 2002. In addition, several speakers noted that the  events of 11 September 2001 demonstrate the need for multilateral  solutions to those global problems that cannot be tackled by only  one country. A number of delegates drew attention to the IPCC TAR  that demonstrates the need for urgent action to address climate  change.

On the current negotiations at COP-7, Switzerland said it could  not accept changes that weaken the Bonn Agreements, and stated  that no country can shirk its responsibilities. Iran, for the G-77/China, stated that neither COP-7 nor the WSSD was the  appropriate forum for raising the issue of new commitments for  developing countries. Canada highlighted the need to be responsive  to those whose participation is critical to entry into force of  the Protocol. On ratification of the Protocol, New Zealand said it  was currently the only Umbrella Group Party to have made a  commitment to ratify in time for WSSD, although he predicted that  he 'will be in good company before too long.' On mechanisms, the Republic of Korea said the full potential of  the mechanisms should be realized, including unilateral CDM.  Ukraine said JI should be given priority and that the main goal  should be the reduction, rather than the redistribution, of  emissions.

Regarding the circumstances and needs of developing countries and  LDCs, many speakers underscored the need for capacity building,  adaptation and technology transfer. Tanzania, Benin and Djibouti  noted that LDCs will be most affected by climate change and have  the least capacity to cope. Regarding assistance to countries  highly dependent on fossil fuel exports, Kuwait proposed removal  of tax incentives and exemptions relating to emissions, and  assistance for diversifying economies.

On next steps in the climate change process, Samoa, for AOSIS,  said that once work on the BAPA is completed, Parties should  review commitments under this regime, and suggested that they be  stronger and more extensive. The US said it would continue to play  a leading role in addressing climate change and is moving ahead  with science-based measures. Brazil said it looked forward to  negotiations on the second commitment period, taking into account  the 'Brazilian proposal' based on the share of responsibility for  causing climate change. Bangladesh supported the speedy  application of the Adaptation and LDC Funds, and highlighted the  particular vulnerability of low lying and small island States.

### STATEMENTS BY OBSERVER STATES, UN BODIES, AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL  AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS

Turkey, an observer State,  said it was looking forward to COP-7's adoption of a decision  removing Turkey from the Annex II list and recognizing its special  circumstances as an Annex I Party.

The WMO highlighted the IPCC's TAR, noting new and stronger  evidence of the contribution of human activities to climate  change. UNEP underlined the need to address the global crises of  ecological degradation and extreme poverty. The GEF underlined its  commitment to supporting capacity building, technology transfer  and adaptation, acknowledged the need for a more consultative  process in the GEF Council, and undertook to address the concerns  raised in the recent evaluation of its performance. Emphasizing  the links between development and climate change, UNDP noted,  inter alia, that its country-office presence is being reinforced.  The IPCC summarized key findings of the TAR, noting that  developing countries will suffer disproportionate impacts.

Morocco's Children's Parliament, Francophone Young People's  Parliament, and the World Youth Organization on Climate Change  gave presentations, with the final speaker urging a move toward a  low carbon-emitting future, entry into force of the Protocol as  the start of a 'long path' in combating climate change, and  completion at COP-7 of decision texts without weakening the Bonn  Agreements.

The International Energy Agency highlighted market-based solutions  to achieve realistic climate change objectives. He highlighted  renewable energy options in combating climate change, while  advocating that no possible fuel or technology solution be  excluded. OPEC highlighted the impacts of climate change response  measures on economies dependent on fossil fuel exports, and  suggested that the 'entire philosophy of energy taxation' be  reconsidered.

Climate Action Network South called for clear commitments to the  various funds agreed at COP-6 Part II, labeling current financial  undertakings as 'pathetic.' The International Chamber of Commerce  advocated early negotiations on second and third commitment  periods, and implementation of the UNFCCC in a manner that would  allow full business participation. The Indigenous Peoples'  Organizations requested a COP decision to grant indigenous peoples  a specific status in the climate change process, and said it  should create an ad hoc intersessional open-ended working group.  Global Legislators Organization for a Balanced Environment  supported a rigorous compliance system, limits on the use of  sinks, and a CDM that involves as many developing countries and  LDCs as possible and includes small-scale projects. Climate Action  Network North linked climate change to health and poverty issues.

The US and European Business Councils For Sustainable Energy  supported a fast track for CDM projects, early crediting, full  transferability of CERs, and a binding compliance regime. The  International Confederation of Free Trade Unions, Trade Union  Advisory Committee to the OECD and European Confederation of Free  Trade Unions highlighted the potential for job creation resulting  from climate change measures and called for employment transition  programmes.

## CLOSING PLENARY

COP-7 President Elyazghi opened the final Plenary on Saturday  morning, 10 November 2001 after a long night of negotiations. The  COP adopted decisions relating to a number of agenda items,  including on the implementation of the Buenos Aires Plan of Action  and input to the World Summit on Sustainable Development.

In their closing statements, many Parties expressed satisfaction  that consensus had been achieved on all outstanding work under the  BAPA, thus bringing to a close this stage of negotiations, and  preparing the way for ratification and entry into force of the  Protocol. Parties also noted that COP-7 was the first COP held in  Africa, a developing country region highly vulnerable to climate  change. Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates and Nigeria  drew attention to Protocol Article 2.3 (adverse effects of P&Ms)  and said this should be on the agenda for substantive  consideration at SB-16. Canada, the EU and Japan expressed the  view that this issue did not require a separate process, as it was  considered under other relevant agenda items.

The EU said COP-7 had marked an important milestone in making the  Kyoto process irreversible. The Russian Federation said COP-7 had  opened up the path for the ratification of the Protocol by all  countries. The Republic of Korea, noted its view that the decision  on the CDM does not exclude any particular projects, including  unilateral ones. The G-77/China said the agreement marked the 'end  of a long journey' toward achieving ratification of the Protocol,  and said there had been many sacrifices made to gain agreement,  particularly on the part of developing countries. Japan said  climate negotiations will now enter a new stage, and looked  forward to consideration of ways to take further steps at COP-8.  Australia said it did not intend to make use of Article 3.4 as it  believes it can rely on relevant activities under Article 3.3.  Noting the events of 11 September, Argentina observed that work on  the BAPA had been completed at a time some might not have thought  ideal, and said terrorism had not stood in the way of the momentum  to complete this cycle of negotiations.

The COP then adopted the report of the session (FCCC/CP/2001/L.16  Adds.1-3), as well as a decision expressing great appreciation to  Michael Zammit Cutajar, the Executive Secretary of the UNFCCC, for  his ten years of 'excellent service' to the climate change  process. The decision was adopted by standing ovation. The COP  also adopted a resolution thanking Morocco and Marrakesh for  hosting COP-7.

In his closing remarks, President Elyazghi said COP-7 had sent a  message of hope for combating climate and for the WSSD, and  declared the meeting closed at 6:45 am.

## CDM EXECUTIVE BOARD

Following the conclusion of COP-7, the newly elected Executive  Board of the Clean Development Mechanism held its first meeting.  The Board elected John Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda) as its first  Chair and Sozaburo Okamatsu (Japan) as Vice Chair. The Board also  set the agenda for its second meeting, which will be held from 21- 23 January 2002 in Bonn.

# A BRIEF ANALYSIS OF COP-7

##     THE CLIMATE CHANGE CARAVAN MOVES TO MARRAKESH

Not far from the Palais des Congrès de Marrakech, site of the COP- 7 climate negotiations, is Jemaa el-Fna, the centuries old market  square that forms the heart of Marrakesh. This is the place where  traders and artists, storytellers and acrobats, carpet-sellers and  snake charmers come together to entertain, and - amidst great  wringing of hands and shaking of heads - to close a good deal. For  the last two weeks the spirited performers and wily traders that  dominate this historic square have been competing for attention  with the seasoned negotiators of the climate change caravan.  Although not quite as accessible - or as entertaining - to the  general public, the antics of the climate negotiators have  nevertheless provided a good lesson to those seeking to understand  the art of driving a hard bargain.

## CLINCHING A DEAL...

Delegates came to Marrakesh with the aim of building on the  historic - although at times seemingly fragile - political deal  concluded at Bonn, and to resolve the outstanding 'technical'  issues relating to the structure of the Kyoto Protocol, thereby  clearing the way for the Protocol's 'timely' entry into force.  Despite what the world media seems to have thought, the conclusion  of the Bonn Agreements did not imply that all the political issues  had been sufficiently resolved. Indeed, during the final days of  the Bonn negotiations it had become apparent not only that some of  the Parties were seeking to re-interpret the Agreements, but also  that many of the remaining 'technical' issues themselves had  significant political undertones. The stakes at Marrakesh were  thus high, and the threat of failure remained a distinct  possibility.

Aware of these concerns, the EU and the G-77/China arrived in  Marrakesh determined to 'sell' a deal that would ensure sufficient  ratifications for entry into force of the Protocol, preferably in  time for the Johannesburg Summit in September 2002. In the early  hours of Saturday, 10 November, it became apparent that such a  deal had indeed been struck, as a result of which ratification of  the Protocol is now a more realistic possibility. But it was  apparent that in making this deal, the EU and the G-77/China had  been compelled to concede to many of the demands of key Umbrella  Group countries. The market for a ratifiable Kyoto Protocol was  very much a buyer's market.

## ...BUT AT WHAT PRICE?

In the knowledge that their participation was essential for entry  into force of the Protocol, the Russian Federation, Japan,  Australia, and Canada used this leverage - both collectively and  individually - to drive down the 'price' of ratification. Playing  the ratification card on a number of occasions, they sought to  weaken the compliance system, lower the eligibility requirements  for mechanisms, undermine opportunities for public participation  and transparency, and minimize requirements for providing  information on sinks.

The true extent of their bargaining power, as well as the level of  their determination to protect national interests, became most  apparent as the three years of negotiating the implementation of  the Buenos Aires Plan of Action drew to a climax. Late on the  evening of Thursday, 8 November, Ministers Moosa and Roch  presented a global package deal aimed at addressing the stalemate  in negotiations. The deal, which proved acceptable to all other  Parties, was rejected by members of the Umbrella Group, with the  following five areas of contention proving the greatest stumbling  blocks:whether Annex I Parties' use of the mechanisms should be  'subject to the procedures and mechanisms on compliance'; whether Annex I Parties' use of the mechanisms should be  dependent upon the reporting of LULUCF data; whether the newly created 'removal units' could be carried  over to subsequent commitment periods; the extent to which Parties should be required to report on  the implementation of Article 3.14 (adverse effects); and whether and how the principles governing the use of sinks  should be operationalized.

The best part of Friday, and the early hours of Saturday morning,  found ministers and high-level negotiators behind closed doors,  seeking to find a compromise solution on these and related issues.  Although the nature of these discussions remains unclear  (transparency was not a distinguishing feature of Marrakesh), the  final outcome suggests a remarkable level of intransigence amongst  certain Parties, most notably the Russian Federation, Japan and  Canada, all of whom secured favorable deals as a precondition for  their ratification.

## BELLIGERENT BARGAINING

Throughout the two weeks in Marrakesh, many observers expressed  despair with the intransigent negotiating style of the Russians.  Despite the insistence of almost all Parties that the Bonn  Agreements were sacrosanct, the Russian Federation succeeded -  through sheer belligerence - in renegotiating its 'Appendix Z'  sinks allowances from 17 to 33 megatons of carbon. They were  persistent, too, in seeking to remove two key eligibility  requirements for use of the mechanisms (submission of sinks  inventories, and adoption of the compliance regime), as well as in  striving to limit procedures for public scrutiny and  participation.

The negotiating tactics of the Japanese delegation - which  numbered over 80 delegates - was further cause for comment. In the  negotiating group on Articles 5, 7 and 8, for example, they proved  to be particularly stubborn. At one point, the G-77/China  responded to a Japanese request with a deeply felt 'you must be  joking!' But they were not, and their stubbornness paid off, as  evidenced in particular by their success in securing an expedited  procedure for the reinstatement of mechanisms' eligibility.

Australia and Canada, in addition to supporting various  interventions by Japan and the Russian Federation, were themselves  vocal on a number of key issues. Australia, for example, was the  driver in seeking to delete reference to a Party-to-Party trigger  in the compliance regime, while Canada sought to undermine the  reporting requirements on sinks issues.

Frustration with the negotiating tactics of different Parties  extended to the Chairs of the negotiating groups. Chair Dovland,  for example, was prompted to express 'extreme disappointment' with  the lack of progress within the group on Articles 5, 7 and 8,  while, in a similar vein, Co-Chair of the mechanisms group, Raúl  Estrada, felt compelled to interject in his group's proceedings.  Following a request from Japan and Canada for clarity on the  meaning of 'sound' rules, he called on them to define  'filibuster.'

## A CHEAP DEAL, BETTER THAN NO DEAL

Although the final deal will leave many observers understandably  disappointed, it is suggested that there is nevertheless room for  cautious optimism, tempered in particular by a healthy dose of  realism as to what is politically and economically feasible.  Notwithstanding the obduracy of Umbrella Group countries on the  final deal, useful progress was made on a number of key issues.

Cameroon, speaking for the African Group, reflected some of the  positive achievements when he expressed pride in the results,  arguing that the Marrakesh Accords would result in the prompt  implementation of the Protocol, and declaring high hopes regarding  access to funds for LDCs and to the fruits of CDM projects.  Important steps in this regard include the election of the CDM  Executive Board, and agreement on the prompt start of certain CDM  projects. (The extent to which CDM projects will actually have a  meaningful impact within Africa remains to be seen).

On the issue of compliance, too, significant progress was made.  This was the only 'crunch-issue' that was fully resolved at a  technical level, a fact that was warmly welcomed by observers who  were pleasantly surprised not only with the swift completion of  the compliance negotiations, but also in their outcome: the  adoption of the most innovative and elaborate non-compliance  procedure for any existing multilateral environmental agreement.  Although the deal struck on the compliance text provides all  Parties with cause for satisfaction, it is the EU and the G-77/China that gained the most, with almost all of their demands  adopted. A key issue that will make or break the compliance regime  - and one that has bedevilled the negotiations - relates to the  legal nature of the decisions adopted by the enforcement branch. A  number of observers expressed support for the outcome reached in  Marrakesh, despite the fact that - as a result of Japan's hardline  stance, and contrary to the wishes of the EU and G-77/China - the  outcome does not guarantee that the consequences will in fact be  legally binding. The final agreement, as contained in the  mechanisms' text, provides that approval of compliance procedures  will be made 'in decision form in addition to any amendment  entailing binding consequences.'  The absence of a clear legally- binding compliance eligibility requirement to use the mechanisms  considerably weakens the strength of the compliance regime. It  remains to be seen whether proponents of a legally binding regime  will indeed ratify a possible amendment adopting the compliance  regime, and whether those Parties opting for non-ratification will  have the goodwill to voluntarily comply with non-legally binding  enforcement decisions.

Other positive and innovative developments include: the  consideration of gender balance in future bodies established under  the UNFCCC; integration of Principles on LULUCF in the Article 7  guidelines; and the establishment of the new 'removal unit' (RMU)  on the basis of a G-77/China proposal.

## COP-7: FINDING WISDOM AND MODERATION IN THE BARGAINING PROCESS?

In his address to the plenary, Morocco's Prince Moulay Rachid,  speaking on behalf of King Mohammed VI, expressed the hope that  'out of your blessed conference may emerge a message of optimism,  of wisdom, of moderation and of hope, a message that is so badly  needed by mankind today.' In the negotiators' world of driving a  hard bargain, particularly where the stakes are so high, seeking  to find moderation in negotiating styles was perhaps unduly  optimistic. But, in having successfully secured a deal - albeit  one that many will find disappointing - it is possible that  Marrakesh will serve as the foundation for a comprehensive  multilateral approach.

To many observers, the real value of the Kyoto Protocol lies not  in its direct impact on limiting greenhouse gas levels, but rather  in serving as a precedent for concerted and coordinated global  action on climate change. In this regard, the outcome of the COP-7  negotiations bodes well, as few Parties now have an excuse not to  ratify the Protocol. Furthermore, as Jan Pronk was overheard  saying at the close of the meeting, 'COP-7 now provides the US  with a suitable legal structure to join the process of combating  global climate change.' It remains to be seen whether Marrakesh will be remembered for its  wisdom and moderation in providing the first steps for a  multilateral response to climate change, or whether it will be  remembered for the belligerent bargaining tactics that many  believe have unduly undermined the environmental integrity of the  Kyoto Protocol.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR BEFORE COP-8

### SOLAR WORLD CONGRESS OF THE INTERNATIONAL SOLAR ENERGY SOCIETY

This congress will be held from 25 November to 2 December 2001, in  Adelaide, Australia. The technical programme will cover various  aspects of renewable energy and energy sustainability. For more  information, contact: ISES 2001; tel: +61-8-8363-4399; fax: +61-8- 8363-4577; e-mail: ises2001@hartleymgt.com.au; Internet:  http://www.unisa.edu.au/ises2001congress/home.html

### MEETING OF THE EXECUTIVE BODY FOR THE CONVENTION ON LONG-RANGE  TRANSBOUNDARY AIR POLLUTION

This meeting will take place from 26- 30 November 2001, in Geneva. For more information, contact: Yves  Berthelot, UNECE; tel: +41-22-917-2670; fax: +41-22-917-0107; e- mail: yves.berthelot@unece.org; Internet:  http://www.unece.org/env/lrtap/

### INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON THE MANAGEMENT AND TECHNOLOGY OF ENERGY  AND ENVIRONMENT

This meeting will be held from 7-8 December 2001,  in Vancouver, BC, Canada. It will seek to address energy,  environmental management and technology issues, and provide a  forum for information exchange among representatives of industry,  government, and academia. For more information, contact ICEEE:  tel. and fax: +1-714-898-8416; e-mail: inquiries@iceee.org;  Internet: http://www.iceee.org

### INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON RENEWABLE ENERGY FOR RURAL  DEVELOPMENT

This conference will be held from 19-21 January 2002,  in Dhaka, Bangladesh, and will consider the technical scope of  power generation from offshore wind, waves, current and tidal  schemes. The conference will also consider technologies for the  medium- to long-term and will address technical challenges in  developing renewable energy sources. For more information,  contact: A.K.M. Sadrul Islam; fax: +880-2-861-3046; e-mail:  sadrul@me.buet.edu

### THIRD INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON NON-GREENHOUSE GASES

This  symposium will be held from 21-23 January 2002, in Maastricht, the  Netherlands. For more information, contact: Symposium Secretariat;  tel: +31-73-621-5985; fax: +31-73-621-6985; e-mail: vvm@wxs.nl;  Internet: http://www.milieukundigen.nl

### EARTH TECHNOLOGIES FORUM

This conference and exhibition on global  climate change and ozone protection technologies and policies will  be held from 25-27 March 2002, in Washington, DC. The conference  is being sponsored by the international Climate Change Partnership  and the Alliance for Responsible Atmospheric Policy. Participants  will discuss current technologies and efforts to bring them into  the marketplace. For more information, contact: tel: +1-703-807- 4052; fax: +1-703- 528-1734; e-mail: earthforum@alcalde-fay.com;  Internet: http://www.earthforum.com

### 16TH SESSION OF THE UNFCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES

SB-16 is  provisionally planned to be held in Bonn, Germany, from 3-14 June  2002. For more information, contact: UNFCCC Secretariat; tel: +49- 228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail:  secretariat@unfccc.de; Internet: http://www.unfccc.de

### 2002 WORLD SUMMIT ON SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (WSSD)

The World  Summit on Sustainable Development will take place ten years after  the Rio Earth Summit (UNCED) in Johannesburg, South Africa, from  2-11 September 2002. The Preparatory Committee will meet from 28  January - 8 February and 25 March - 5 April 2001 at UN  headquarters in New York, and from 27 May - 7 June 2001 in  Indonesia. For more information, contact: Andrey Vasilyev, DESA,  New York; tel: +1-212-963-5949; fax: +1-212-963-4260; e-mail:  vasilyev@un.org; Major groups contact: Zehra Aydin-Sipos, DESA;  tel: +1-212-963-8811; fax: +1-212-963-1267; e-mail: aydin@un.org;  Internet: http://www.johannesburgsummit.org/

### EIGHTH CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE UNFCCC

COP-8 is  provisionally planned to take place from 23 October - 1 November  2002, at a location to be determined. For more information,  contact: the UNFCCC Secretariat, Bonn, Germany; tel: +49-228-815- 1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.int;  Internet: http://www.unfccc.int/