---
title: "HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE FCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES MEETINGS, FRIDAY, 4 JUNE 1999"
id: enb12104e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12104e
date: 1999-06-04
abstract: "The Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice  (SBSTA) discussed development and transfer of technology and  FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9 (adverse effects). The Joint Working  Group on compliance met in the afternoon. Contact groups were  convened on: the budget; Annex I communications; non-Annex I  communications; land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF);  and the Protocol mechanisms. Informal consultations on research  and systematic observation were held."
---

# SBSTA

KOREA supported the consultative process on development and  transfer of technology and noted the critical and catalytic role  governments could play. EGYPT stressed the need to make publicly  owned technology available to developing countries and expressed  concern about the limited attention given to adaptation  technologies. The EU favored a practical sectoral approach for  the forthcoming workshops and said they should take stock of  existing expertise, technology needs and capacity building.  AUSTRALIA stressed the importance of country specific market- based approaches, the private sector and the role of the clean  development mechanism (CDM) in facilitating technology transfer.  The US, NETHERLANDS, GERMANY, FRANCE and AUSTRALIA announced  financial contributions to support the consultative process.

The US reported on the Technology Cooperation Agreement Pilot  Project (TCAPP), a bilateral effort to facilitate effective  technology transfer aimed at assisting developing countries  attract investment in clean energy technologies. The G-77/CHINA,  supported by KIRIBATI, MAURITIUS, PHILIPPINES and CAMEROON,  suggested the creation of a permanent mechanism to facilitate  technology transfer. The PHILIPPINES, with CAMEROON, said  technology transfer should be tackled as a commitment not as a  commercial undertaking. MAURITIUS noted the urgent need to  identify specific regional requirements. SLOVENIA underscored  the need for capacity building, as well as incentives to the  owners of technology to deliver them to the developing  countries. He also stressed the need for a systematic approach  to technology transfer, partly through the CDM and partly  through Convention bodies. THAILAND expressed his support for  the consultative process and offered to host a regional  workshop. Climate Technology Initiative described its work  addressing the questions and issues raised by Decision 4/CP.4,  through, inter alia, regional seminars on technology diffusion  in coordination with business partners. CAMEROON stressed the  importance of training to enable developing countries to benefit  from technology transfer. Chair Chow said an informal group  would aim to produce conclusions for SBSTA on Wednesday.

Mohammed Reza Salamat (Iran) reported on informal consultations  on the terms of reference for a workshop envisaged on  implementation of Articles 4.8 and 4.9 of the Convention and 2.3  and 3.14 (adverse effects) of the Protocol. He said the group  reached consensus on the terms of reference  (FCCC/SBSTA/1999/CRP.1) that will be annexed to the COP-4  decision 5/CP.4 that initiated the consultations. He stressed  the need for balanced participation in the workshop by developed  and developing country experts, in particular from Africa. The  G-77/CHINA reserved its right to introduce substantive issues  should other Parties do the same. Delegates adopted the terms of  reference by consensus.

# JOINT WORKING GROUP ON COMPLIANCE

On the design of a compliance system, many countries stressed  the system's facilitative and preventative nature. The US also  emphasized the importance of transparency and, with JAPAN,  called for reasonable certainty about consequences for non- compliance. AUSTRALIA, CANADA and the US called for a regime  tailored to the Kyoto Protocol, as it differs from other  multilateral environmental agreements. JAPAN said the system may  need a short grace period at the end of commitment period. The  EU said the system should apply to all obligations under the  Protocol. It could also provide advice to Parties on  implementation, prevent disputes, and impose consequences,  including sanctions, if appropriate. With NEW ZEALAND, he  stressed the importance of due process and allowing the Parties  involved to participate. IRAN noted that Protocol Article 18  (non-compliance) does not specify any particular articles, but  applies to the entire Protocol. He called on the COP to create a  specific body for non-compliance and said an expert review team  does not have the authority or capacity to determine non- compliance. The G-77/CHINA said it was working on a position and  unable to participate.

On institutional issues, the US noted a number of questions  including: who could trigger the non-compliance mechanism;  whether one body would deal with both the facilitative and non- compliance aspects of the process; and whether the body would be  composed of Parties or be independent.The EU said compliance  processes should: operate through one supervisory body; function  through a single set of procedures; and provide for measures  that apply in a graduated manner. An independent committee of  experts from relevant fields should operate the body. NEW  ZEALAND said creating a list of non-compliance scenarios was  impractical. CLIMATE ACTION NETWORK supported a standing  committee composed of independent experts to respond to a wide  array of circumstances. Action could be triggered by the Article  8 review process, a Party, the Secretariat or civil society.

The US said the compliance system would apply to any obligation  of the Protocol but not to non-binding obligations. AOSIS  cautioned against attempting to differentiate legally binding  from non-legally binding obligations, and IRAN underscored the  legally binding character of the Protocol as a whole. CHINA said  Article 18 applies to all obligations of the Protocol. AUSTRALIA  said a distinction between binding and non-binding aspects would  be necessary for practical reasons. AUSTRALIA and JAPAN, opposed  by the UNITED ARAB EMIRATES, stressed the usefulness of peer  reviews, rather than a punitive regime, to enforce obligations.

On consequences of non-compliance, all delegates emphasized the  preliminary character of their comments. The EU, supported by  JAPAN and AOSIS, noted its preference for a system that combines  'hard' and 'soft' enforcement measures that are graded according  to the gravity of the breach and the nature of the obligation.  CANADA referred to procedural steps leading to the application  of consequences as an integral part of the compliance system.  She highlighted the need to determine instances where  consequences would automatically apply. The US referred to prior  agreement and a degree of automatic application as requisites  for binding consequences. She drew attention to a provision in  the Protocol (Article 6.1.c) penalizing non-compliance by  forbidding a Party to sell emission reduction units when not in  compliance with its obligations under Articles 5 (national  systems for estimation of net emissions) and 7 (annual GHG  inventories). CLIMATE ACTION NETWORK noted the need for an  innovative approach and referred to a compliance fund whereby  Parties in non-compliance can choose to pay into the fund.

# CONTACT GROUPS AND INFORMAL CONSULTATIONS

### Protocol Mechanisms

The Joint Working Group on mechanisms met  in the evening to deliberate on the Chairs' Synthesis of  Parties' Proposals. The G-77/CHINA said that it was still in the  process of synthesizing national positions and requested time to  deliberate later that evening.

Annex I Communications: The contact group on Annex I  communications met in morning and evening sessions to consider  draft guidelines for reporting national inventories of  greenhouse gases. Participants negotiated substantive amendments  to text on: estimates of emissions and removals; the response to  inventory assessment; and national inventory reports.  Participants also considered the updated draft common reporting  format tables, and made a number of changes, including, inter  alia: deleting the table on anticipated future improvements in  methodologies; removing national and foreign flag statistics in  fuel consumption figures for international transport in the  table on sectoral background data for energy; including a data  year indicator for all appropriate tables; and making optional  the use of a number of tables relating to land-use change and  forestry, as well as making provision of these tables a part of  national inventory reports.

Non-Annex I Communications: A contact group chaired by Dan  Reifsnyder (US) and Paul Maclons (South Africa) met in the  afternoon to consider non-Annex I communications. The G-77/CHINA  tabled a draft decision on initial and subsequent national  communications from non-Annex I Parties to be considered for  adoption at COP-5. The proposal outlines decisions on:  guidelines and guidance; timing of submissions of non-Annex I  national communications; financial and technical support;  consideration of non-Annex I communications; and the review of  the GEF's enabling activities.

### LULUCF

The contact group on land use, land-use change and  forestry (LULUCF) met in the afternoon to consider draft  conclusions on policy and procedural matters aimed at  facilitating future development of rules and guidelines for  LULUCF. After considerable debate, delegates could not agree on  many elements of the proposed text, and placed a number of  sentences and paragraphs in brackets. The group decided to  postpone its discussion on the draft conclusions pending  consideration of a proposed process flow chart of SBSTA  activities from SBSTA-10 through to SBSTA-13 designed to  facilitate progress in negotiations.

Budget: The contact group on the budget, chaired by Mohamed Ould  el Ghaouth (Mauritania), met at noon. Presentations were made by  the Secretariat on its activities regarding non-Annex I Party  greenhouse gas (GHG) communications and inventory data. The  Secretariat noted that extensive analysis of non-Annex I Party  communications indicated that many Parties had provided more  information than that requested by the IPCC guidelines, that  communications differed slightly from the IPCC format and that  several innovative elements were improvements to the process.  The Secretariat also referred to capacity-building activities  related to preparation of national communications.

The PHILIPPINES underscored the need for continuity of work on  non-Annex I Party communications, inquired about the extent of  compliance to IPCC guidelines and noted the need to identify  Parties' technical and financial constraints. On the status of  carry-overs, the Secretariat indicated that it is assessed on a  biannual basis and that the status for 1999 would only be known  by the end of the year. The US referred to a budgetary rule that  impedes the expenditure of carry-overs from previous period  contributions as a 'perverse incentive' against timely payment  of contributions. The EU said untimely contributions were not  the only cause of carry-overs. The Secretariat suggested a COP  decision to allow expenditure of carry-overs up to the amount  approved by the budget.

Research and Systematic Observation: Delegates meeting in  informal consultations on research and systematic observation  agreed on a series of conclusions that, inter alia, urged  Parties to enhance support for capacity building in developing  countries to enable them to reverse degradation of observing  capacity and improve data collection and use to meet local,  regional and international needs.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

Attempts to clarify the sequencing and content of work on LULUCF  continued in the corridors after little progress was made during  an afternoon meeting to discuss 'draft conclusions' on  methodological issues. Hints of a convergence of views began to  emerge at the Executive Secretary's reception based on a  proposed process flow chart tabled by members of the Umbrella  Group. The IPCC is expected to seek clarification on some  elements, including the provision of adequate time for  governments to 'digest' the IPCC Special Report before a Special  Workshop next year.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR

## Contact Group on Mechanisms

The contact group on mechanisms is  scheduled to meet at 10:00 am.

Joint Working Group: The Joint Working Group on compliance is  scheduled to meet at 4:00 pm.

Consult the meeting board for the time and location of other  meetings.