---
title: "THE THIRD CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE UNITED NATIONS FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE, 1 - 10 DECEMBER 1997"
id: enb1267e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb1267e
date: 1997-12-10
abstract: "The Third Conference of the Parties (COP-3) to the United Nations  Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC) will open on 1  December 1997 at the Kyoto International Conference Hall in Kyoto,  Japan. Delegates will meet in Plenary, then in a Committee of the  Whole (COW) to discuss the adoption of a protocol or another legal  instrument. A high-level segment will be convened from 6 - 7  December to hear statements from ministers and other heads of  delegation.  The resumed eighth session of the Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin  Mandate (AGBM-8) met on 30 November 1997. Delegates met informally  to discuss the treatment of greenhouse gas sinks, and then in  Plenary to conclude discussions on the AGBM report to COP-3.  Delegates agreed that informal consultations on sinks would  continue through COP-3."
---

# AGBM

AGBM Chair Raúl Estrada Oyuela reminded delegates that this  meeting represented a continuation of AGBM-8, which began in Bonn  a few weeks ago, and noted that the purpose was to address  outstanding issues and facilitate the negotiations of COP-3.

The Secretariat reviewed the documents under consideration: the  report of AGBM-8 (FCCC/AGBM/1997/8); the revised text under  negotiation (FCCC/CP/1997/2 and Add.1); a technical review of the  revised text under negotiation (FCCC/CP/1997/ CRP.1); a note on  measures by non-Annex I Parties to reduce the growth of their  emissions (FCCC/AGBM/1997/CRP.5); a note on information submitted  by Parties on possible criteria for differentiation  (FCCC/AGBM/1997/Misc.3 and Add.1 and 2); responses to a  questionnaire on sinks (FCCC/AGBM/1997/Misc.4 and Add.1 and  Add.2); and a synthesis of information from Annex I national  communications of on sources and sinks in the land-use change and  forestry sector (FCCC/TP/1997/5).

Chair Estrada highlighted the document on measures taken by non- Annex I Parties to reduce their emissions. He noted that messages  coming from many sources, such as the press and governments, seem  to deny the mitigation efforts made by developing countries. He  said the document shows clear progress and asked delegates to keep  this in mind, particularly when some developed countries that have  not fulfilled their commitments under the Convention argue that  developing country commitments should be established on a  quantitative basis.

He said the technical review paper points out aspects that need to  be corrected in the draft protocol. He also noted that the  addendum to the draft negotiating text includes a draft amendment  to the Convention. The draft is an attempt to reflect the  paragraphs prepared for a protocol in a different format. He noted  that that adoption of an amendment would be done by three-quarters  of the Parties. There is less definition on the way a protocol  must be adopted. He said negotiations would continue on the basis  of a protocol.

The RUSSIAN FEDERATION presented a proposal on Article 3 (QELROs).  The proposal states that Parties included in Annex I shall ensure  that their collective net aggregate anthropogenic carbon dioxide  equivalent emissions of the GHGs listed in Annex A, expressed in  terms of an emissions budget, as tonnes of carbon dioxide  equivalent, inscribed in Attachment I, do not exceed [__] tonnes.  The text also states that each Party included in Annex I shall  ensure that its net aggregate anthropogenic carbon dioxide emis- sions of the GHG listed in Annex A do not exceed its commitments,  expressed in terms of emissions budgets, inscribed in Attachment  I. The text proposes that commitments for each Party included in  Annex I shall be established using the process set out in Annex B  and shall be inscribed in Attachment I.

Chair Estrada noted that there were many unresolved issues  regarding QELROs and delegates must decide at some point the  number of gases to be included in the protocol. He proposed that  delegates work from the presumption that the protocol would cover  six gases -- carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O), methane  (CH4), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and  sulphur hexafluoride (SF6).  The UK asked that the distinction between the three-gas and six- gas approaches be maintained. HUNGARY supported using a three-gas  basket, and addressing the three additional gases later. EGYPT  reserved the right to consult within the G-77/China, which will  provide a joint statement. The RUSSIAN FEDERATION preferred the  three-gas approach at this stage. He said that if the basket  includes more than three gases, then obligations must be  considered further and there must be flexibility. TANZANIA high- lighted the G-77/China proposal, which would call upon Parties to  reduce emissions of three gases and make efforts to control and  phase out the other three.

The US indicated that it had consistently advocated a  comprehensive approach regarding the inclusion of a broad spectrum  of GHGs within the scope of the protocol or legally binding  instrument and, therefore, supported the proposal by the Chair to  work on the basis of six GHGs, instead of three. NORWAY noted its  support for the proposal by the Chair and said that methodologies  were available to work on the basis of six GHGs. CHINA reiterated  the G-77/China's preference for a gas-by-gas approach. SWITZERLAND  said that it originally made a proposal based on three GHGs, but  favored the inclusion of all GHGs not covered by the Montreal  Protocol, including HFCs, PFCs, and SF6. POLAND suggested that  additional GHGs could be included at a later stage. BRAZIL noted  that long-lived gases required the attention of the AGBM and hoped  that consensus could be reached in this respect.

The Chair of the informal group on sinks, Antonio La Viña, (the  Philippines) reported that the group had worked on a proposal  containing four options. According to the first one, QELROs should  be calculated on a 'net-net' basis, i.e., all sources minus all  sinks in both the base year and the target year for the first  budget period; the second option proposes that a sink category  called 'land use change and forestry' (LUCF) not be considered for  the establishment of QELROs in the first budget period, but  provides for the IPCC to improve methodologies geared to the  inclusion of LUCF during the second budget period. The third  option proposes the exclusion of LUCF for the establishment of  QELROs, with the proviso that they be included at a later stage by  the Meeting of the Parties (MOP) on the basis of new modalities  and revised IPCC methods. Under the fourth option, the  establishment of QELROs excludes the LUCF category, but allows GHG  removal by 'new activities' to be counted towards compliance if  'verifiable.' The 'new activities' would be defined on the basis  of advice from the IPCC and agreed upon by the COP.

The informal group Chair noted that while Parties acknowledged the  importance of sinks, they discussed scientific uncertainties  regarding sinks' GHG absorption capacity, and methodologies used  to calculate this. He noted that options 3 and 4 might serve as  basis for a compromise solution, considering the marked divergence  of views on options 1 and 2. CHINA drew attention to the fact that budget periods appeared  under each of the options, and recalled the G-77/China's objection  to this concept. BRAZIL and ICELAND indicated that the issue of  sinks needed to be sorted out before settling targets for QELROs.  BRAZIL noted the value of the third option as a basis for compro- mise. It was agreed that consultations on the matter would  continue during COP-3.

Introducing a discussion on budgets, Chair Estrada noted that the  G-77/China favors target years and there is a general trend  towards acceptance of the possibility of budgets. The G-77/CHINA  said the assumption of a consensus on budgeting could be prema- ture. The budget concept does not appear in the Berlin Mandate.  CHINA said the budget concept has been introduced along with a  string of extraneous issues. A text submitted by the G-77/CHINA,  setting out six reasons for rejecting the budget concept, had been  suppressed and did not appear in the Chair's revised negotiating  text. Chair Estrada said his revised paper included only those  items which had actually been discussed at the AGBM in Bonn. He  said the possibility of using budgets is open.

He called for compromise on policies and measures, noting that  some delegations are seeking a mandatory approach while others  want none. The EU said it had made considerable concessions in  Bonn by simplifying proposals on which policies and measures  should be mandatory. EGYPT invited the Chair to present a balanced  proposal. The RUSSIAN FEDERATION proposed a middle path consisting  of national measures. He said the question of policies and  measures is linked to other issues including the basket of gases  to be adopted and the level of flexibility to be accorded to  Russia and other countries with economies in transition. He urged  delegations to begin seeking compromise immediately and not to  leave all the negotiating work to government ministers. The EU  tabled a new proposal, stating that any signatory or Party not  included in Annex 1 nor acting under Article 10 may notify the  depository that it has opted to adopt and implement some or all of  the policies and measures and/or to participate in the coor- dination process referred to elsewhere in the protocol. The G-77/  CHINA objected to the inclusion of a reference to non-Annex I  Parties.

The Chair said a title for a possible protocol had been agreed at  an expanded Bureau meeting: 'The Kyoto Protocol to the UN  Framework Convention on Climate Change on Greenhouse Gases.' The  G-77/CHINA and others said it was premature to decide a name  before the content of the protocol. The Chair said that the  rapporteur should summarize the day's session for COP-3, noting  that he had planned to add conclusions to the AGBM report but no  conclusions had been reached. The AGBM adjourned.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

The AGBM Chair, Raul Estrada, is expected to take over the task of  chairing the QELROs working group during COP-3. The new role -  together with his job of chairing the COW - will put Estrada in a  key position to pursue his proactive approach to the negotiations  and bring his influence to bear on the high level negotiations  expected at the end of COP-3. At Sunday's resumed AGBM meeting,   Estrada demonstrated his ability to send clear signals to Parties  pursing demands of others whose demands he views as unsustainable.  Drawing attention to a document he commissioned on developing  country efforts to address climate change, he called on those  developed countries that have not fulfilled their existing  commitments to take note.

#     THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

### PLENARY

Plenary will meet at 10:00 am in the Main Hall.

### COW

The COW will convene immediately after the completion of  Agenda Item 2(f) (organization of work) in Plenary.