---
title: "SUMMARY OF THE WORKSHOP OF THE CONSULTATIVE GROUP OF EXPERTS ON NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS FROM NON-ANNEX I PARTIES: 10-11 APRIL 2002"
id: enb12190e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12190e
date: 2002-04-11
abstract: "The workshop of the Consultative Group of Experts (CGE) on  national communications from non-Annex I Parties to the United  Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) was held  from 10-11 April 2002 in Bonn, Germany. More than 40 delegates  attended the session, including expert representatives of  governments and intergovernmental organizations."
---

The objective of the CGE is to improve national communications  from non-Annex I Parties to the UNFCCC. During the workshop,  participants met in plenary sessions to hear reports from the CGE  task groups on greenhouse gas inventories, vulnerability and  adaptation assessment (V&A) and research and systematic  observation (RSO), and education, training and public awareness  (ETPA), as well as the crosscutting issues of information and  networking, national circumstances and planning, and financial and  technical support. The group also heard presentations on the  problems and constraints facing some non-Annex I Parties in  relation to the preparation of their national communications.

Participants convened in four Working Group sessions on Wednesday  afternoon, 10 April, and Thursday, 11 April, focusing on  greenhouse gas inventories, V&A and RSO, abatement, and ETPA.  These Working Groups considered new issues that have emerged since  the last CGE workshop held in Panama in March 2001, relating to  transfer of technology, capacity building, financial and technical  support, and information and networking. The Working Groups  prepared conclusions, which were presented in a plenary session on  Thursday afternoon,11 April. Participants then discussed the draft  revised guidelines for the preparation of national communications  from non-Annex I Parties, concluding on Friday, 12 April. These  discussions were closed, and are not included in this report. The  conclusions from the workshop will be compiled by the UNFCCC  Secretariat into an informational document to be considered by the  UNFCCC subsidiary bodies at their next sessions in June 2002.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE UNFCCC AND THE CGE

Climate change is considered one of the most serious threats to  the sustainability of the world's environment, human health and  well-being, and the global economy. Mainstream scientists agree  that the Earth's climate is being affected by the build-up of  greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide, caused by human  activities. A majority of scientists believe that prompt  precautionary action is necessary.

### UNFCCC

The international political response to climate change  took shape with the development of the United Nations Framework  Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). Adopted in 1992, the UNFCCC  sets out a framework for action aimed at stabilizing atmospheric  concentrations of greenhouse gases at a level that would prevent  human-induced actions from leading to 'dangerous interference'  with the climate system. The UNFCCC entered into force on 21 March  1994. It now has 186 Parties.

### NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS

The UNFCCC stipulated that Parties must  report on the actions they take or are planning in order to  implement the UNFCCC. Consistent with the principle of 'common but  differentiated responsibilities,' the content and timetable for  submitting these reports - or 'national communications' - varies  depending on whether the country is an Annex I (developed or  economy-in-transition) Party to the Convention or a non-Annex I  (developing country) Party. Non-Annex I Parties have a more  flexible timetable for preparing and submitting their national  communications. Most non-Annex I Parties must submit their first  national communications within three years of the Convention's  entry into force for that Party, although the least developed  countries (LDCs) can make their initial communication 'at their  discretion.' Non-Annex I Parties are also eligible for some  financial and technical assistance from the Global Environment  Facility (GEF). In addition, some other donors and agencies have  assisted non-Annex I Parties in preparing their national  communications.

Further work on non-Annex I Parties' national communications was  completed at the Second Conference of the Parties (COP-2), held in  Geneva in July 1996. At COP-2 delegates agreed on the substance  that should be contained in national communications, and set out  guidelines for such communications (as contained in the Annex to  decision 10/CP.2).

### THE CONSULTATIVE GROUP OF EXPERTS (CGE)

At COP-5, held in late  1999 in Bonn, Parties initiated a process to review the reporting  guidelines agreed at COP-2 and to improve the preparation of non- Annex I national communications. To facilitate this process, the  COP established a Consultative Group of Experts on national  communications from non-Annex I Parties (CGE). The COP decided  that the CGE should be composed of five experts from each of the  developing country regions (Africa, Asia and the Pacific, and  Latin America and the Caribbean), six experts from Annex I  Parties, and three experts from organizations with relevant  experience. The CGE has met four times to date. In addition, three  regional workshops have taken place, and a fourth, interregional  workshop, was held in March 2001.

The work and mandate of the CGE and the process of reviewing the  reporting guidelines have been taken up during recent meetings of  the COP's Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI), most recently  during COP-7, held in late 2002 in Marrakech, Morocco. At COP-7,  delegates agreed to continue the process of reviewing the  guidelines in accordance with decision 8/CP.5, with a view to  improving these guidelines at COP-8. They also agreed that the  UNFCCC Secretariat should prepare some draft guidelines as well as  background information on national communications from non-Annex I  Parties submitted as of 31 December 2001, and that these should be  considered during an intersessional workshop prior to SB-16, will  take place in June 2002 (FCCC/CP/2001/L.20).

# REPORT OF THE WORKSHOP

Martha Perdomo, Manager, Non-Annex I Implementation Sub-Programme,  UNFCCC Secretariat, opened the workshop on Wednesday morning, 10  April. She welcomed participants and thanked the Netherlands, US,  Switzerland, Germany as well as Uruguay for providing financial  and other support necessary for the meeting to take place. She  presented some background information on the development of the  national communications process, noting that COP-2 had provided  guidance for the more than 174 first and second national  communications from non-Annex I countries submitted to date. She  stressed that the process has been one of learning by doing, with  the number of submissions growing from year to year. In this  context, she noted that the first compilation and synthesis of  non-Annex I Parties' national communications prepared by the  UNFCCC Secretariat had comprised 10 submissions, whereas the  fourth compilation currently underway will include 85 submissions.  She drew attention to the COP-7 decision mandating the  organization of two workshops, and said the current workshop was  the first of these.

CGE Chair Philip Weech (Bahamas) welcomed participants and  stressed that the purpose of the workshop was to exchange  experiences and information, including from the subregional and  local levels. He highlighted the mandate of the CGE, as provided  for in decision 8/CP.5, which includes: exchanging experiences;  considering the need for financial and technical resources;  considering information in non-Annex I national communications;  reviewing existing activities and programmes to support the  preparation of national communications; identifying difficulties  in the preparation of national communications; identifying  analytical and methodological issues with a view to improving the  quality of national communications; examining national  communications with a view to overcoming difficulties in the use  of methodologies and guidelines; and encouraging expert  interaction.

## CGE TASK GROUP REPORTS

On Wednesday, 10 April, participants heard presentations of the  CGE task group reports on greenhouse gas inventories;  vulnerability and adaptation assessment (V&A) and research and  systematic observation (RSO); abatement; education, training and  public awareness (ETPA); and crosscutting issues. These  presentations focused on those national communications submitted  following the Panama workshop in March 2001, and before 31  December 2001.

### GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORIES

Ayité-lo Ajavon (Togo), Coordinator of  the CGE Task Group on greenhouse gas inventories, presented  findings relating to inventories of emissions and removals from 26  of the newly-submitted national communications. On methodological  issues, he said all Parties had followed the 1995 and the revised  1996 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Guidelines  to compile their inventories, although some Parties had employed  national methodologies for certain sectors. He observed that all  Parties had presented emissions estimates for the three main gases  (CO2, CH4, and N2O), and that some had also done so for the ozone  precursors. Nearly all Parties had reported inventories in  accordance with the UNFCCC Guidelines, and most had provided more  information than requested. He indicated that uncertainty was  addressed qualitatively by ten Parties, quantitatively by two, and  both qualitatively and quantitatively by one Party.

On data acquisition, databases and networking, he noted that  activity data was generally referenced. He noted that IPCC default  emission factors were used, although Parties had indicated that  these do not reflect national circumstances. He observed that some  Parties had developed emission factors, which express emission  quantity per unit of activity, for certain sectors to fit national  circumstances. On institutional issues, Parties had identified a  number of areas for improvement, including activity data and  emission factors. Parties had also noted the need for financial  and technical assistance to improve their inventories.

Ajavon then described the results compiled from newly-submitted  national communications. For CO2, he said fuel combustion in the  energy sector was the largest contributor reported. For CH4,  agriculture and waste were the most significant sources of  emissions, while for N2O, agriculture and fuel combustion were the  primary contributors. He stressed that for most Parties, CO2 was  the primary gas, with CH4 or N2O being most important in a few  exceptional cases. He summarized the results by noting that  energy, agriculture and land use change and forestry (LUCF) were  the most important sources of greenhouse gas emissions, with  removal by sinks from LUCF in most Parties offsetting emissions  from these sectors.

### VULNERABILITY AND ADAPTATION ASSESSMENT, AND RESEARCH AND  SYSTEMATIC OBSERVATION

Isabelle Niang-Diop (Senegal), Coordinator  of the CGE Task Group on V&A and RSO, reported on findings from  the last 28 national communications submitted. She observed that  the time-horizons of several scenarios were for 2020 and 2050,  rather than for 2050 and 2100, noting that this might accommodate  decision makers who are more interested in short-term horizons.  She indicated that the number of sectors considered had increased  to ten, including human settlements, which were considered as part  of the coastal zone assessment. On adaptation, she noted that most  countries had presented a list of adaptation options for two  extreme and opposite scenarios, making it difficult to create an  adaptation strategy. She said that constraints had not been  reported extensively, but that these appeared to include limited  data, availability of models, and funding. On needs, countries had  identified: additional research; the expansion of studies within  each sector; capacity building; technology transfer; better  techniques for collecting and analyzing data; and the  strengthening of institutions in charge of climate change issues.  She concluded by observing that no progress had been made on  integrated impact assessments, or in an-alysis, costing, and  prioritization of adaptation options, and drew attention to  serious concerns about potential damages linked to extreme events,  in particular those relating to the El Niño Southern Oscillation  (ENSO).

Participants discussed the use of models, and the link between the  experience gained in identifying adaptation measures and the  design of LDC National Adaptation Programmes of Action (NAPAs).  Delegates was noted that, for the purpose of NAPAs, little could  be learned from the V&A part of the national communications  process.

### ABATEMENT

Lorraine Lotter (South Africa), Coordinator of the CGE  Task Group on abatement, spoke on abatement reporting. She  recalled that reporting on abatement options is voluntary and  remarked such reporting has been limited. On methodological  issues, she stressed that reporting guidelines are limited, but  that abatement analysis should consider the potential social and  environmental impacts along with economic consequences. On recent  national communications, she said constraints curtailing reporting  included lack of funding and technical expertise, inadequate  institutions and the absence of public and political support. She  suggested a balance be found between the voluntary nature of  reporting on abatement options and the need for such reporting to  attract potential investors in the Clean Development Mechanism  (CDM) under the Kyoto Protocol to the UNFCCC. She stressed that  reporting can help prioritize potential projects, enhance the  negotiating strength of Parties when engaging potential CDM  partners, and increase public awareness.

In the ensuing discussion, Fiji remarked that creating greenhouse  gas inventories is a constraint to reporting on abatement options,  adding that linking abatement options reporting to CDM work would  stimulate abatement options analysis in countries that have  neglected it to date. Brazil and Kenya expressed concerns about  such a linkage, while Switzerland remarked that a linkage could  facilitate funding applications for second national  communications.

### EDUCATION, TRAINING AND PUBLIC AWARENESS

George Manful, Programme  Officer, Implementation Programme, UNFCCC Secretariat, discussed  education, training and networking. He remarked that reporting on  this issue was varied and that drawing a distinction between  ongoing activities and those that are yet to be implemented is  difficult. On education, he noted some success in integrating  climate change issues into educational programmes, particularly at  the university level. On training, he remarked that training  scientific, technical, and managerial personnel is critical to  implementing the UNFCCC, but that the focus and magnitude of  existing training programmes is unclear. He explained that  training activities were an important part of preparing national  communications, and that training a critical mass of experts would  give Parties the capacity to initiate climate change projects. He  noted the need for more financial support.

In the ensuing discussion, one delegate suggested that a universal  set of education and training materials be created and translated  into various national languages. Participants agreed that such  materials could be useful if adapted to address national  circumstances.

### CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES

Brian Challenger (Antigua and Barbuda),  Coordinator of the CGE Task Group on cross-cutting issues, spoke  on the issues of information and networking, and financial and  technical support. He said networking at the national level often  takes place through national climate change coordinating  committees composed of various actors including government, the  private sector, NGOs and scientific institutions. He also provided  examples of regional and subregional networking. On financial and  technical support, he described his analysis of recently submitted  national communications, noting that one constraint appeared to be  the lack of a template for presenting countries' needs. He  explained that most countries had identified capacity building as  a priority, and that sustainable energy production and adaptation  had emerged as significant needs. He supported creating a template  for reporting of needs and constraints in terms of financial and  technical support in order to enhance consistency, transparency  and comparability.

In the ensuing discussion, speakers noted that good examples with  regard to cross-cutting issues can be identified within the  national communications submitted, but that guidance should not be  too prescriptive, given that each country's unique situations and  circumstances.

## PRESENTATION AND DISCUSSION OF PROBLEMS AND CONSTRAINTS

On Wednesday, 10 April, participants considered reports by a  number of countries on their experiences in preparing national  communications, focusing on problems and constraints.

### ALBANIA

Ermira Fida, National Coordinator for Climate Change  Enabling Activity, Climate Change Unit, Albanian Ministry of  Environment, presented on the first national communication of  Albania, which is now in its final drafting stage. Regarding the  greenhouse gas inventory, she noted weaknesses such as the lack of  cooperation between institutions and the lack of legal obligations  for reporting, leading to problems in accessing data without a  fee. She drew attention to problems with the UNDP/GEF National  Execution (NEX) project structure, which she described as  inflexible. She also highlighted various technical problems,  including a lack of disaggregated data and uncertain or fragmented  data in some sectors such as transport and LUCF. A lack of trained  experts and individuals with previous experience also presented a  serious challenge. In addition, Fida noted similar problems with  regard to the abatement analysis, stressing the lack of scenarios,  guidelines and models. On vulnerability assessment, she drew  attention to a lack of regular monitoring, and difficulties in  developing baseline scenarios due to unreliable data prior to  1990. She said better software was necessary to assist, inter  alia, in simulating extreme events and in developing socioeconomic  scenarios. On ETPA, she indicated that awareness is low in  Albania, and said this represents a constraint. In response to a  question from the Netherlands, she said the Albanian national  adaptation programme of action is submitted as part of the  national communication, and is also integrated in the national  sustainable development plan.

### BRAZIL

In his presentation, Jose Miguez, Coordinator on Global  Change, Brazilian Ministry of Science and Technology, addressed  the issue of project management during the preparation of the  national communication of Brazil from the perspective of the  project coordinator. He underscored a variety of elements required  for success, including keeping the project on schedule and within  a budget, and ensuring high quality of the end project. On meeting  project deadlines, he noted delays in initiating the project due  to disagreements with the GEF, among other factors. On the budget,  he underscored that funding from the GEF had been half the amount  requested, and that additional funding had come from national  entities. He stressed the need for specific emission factors, for  instance for sugar cane ethanol used as fuel, cattle nourished on  different types of feed, and for the 200 different forest types in  Brazil. He said obtaining activity data from private companies was  difficult. He also noted that social and economic development and  poverty eradication are priorities in Brazil, not climate change.  On project control, he outlined problems with contracts,  difficulty with communication among participants, and a lack of  financial resources, authority, and alternatives. He explained  that the three different clients, the Ministry of Science and  Technology, the UNFCCC, and UNDP/GEF had different expectations  with regard to the end product.

On current status, he said Brazil employed a multi-institutional,  multi-stakeholder team spanning 100 institutions and 500  professionals, and indicated that the national communication will  be submitted during 2002.

### FIJI

Mahendra Kumar, Associate Professor of Physics, School of  Pure & Applied Sciences at the University of the South Pacific,  remarked on the problems and constraints Fiji is encountering  while preparing its first national communication. On institutional  constraints, he explained that awareness among decision makers is  weak, guidance from outside experts is limited and support for the  national climate change coordinator is insufficient. On human  resource constraints, he noted a lack of qualified personnel,  inadequate training opportunities, and high turnover. On financial  constraints, he remarked on insufficient funds for hiring external  consultants and for providing a financial incentive for climate  change team members to complete their work. He said technical  constraints include lack of data or access to data, and lack of  appropriate methodology for V&A. Problems unique to Fiji include  the year-long political crisis that began in May 2000, the  bureaucracy's lengthy approval process for hiring outside  consultants, the low status of the climate change coordinator  within the bureaucracy, and the government's treatment of climate  change as a stand-alone issue.

### PAPUA NEW GUINEA

Gwendoline Sissiou, Climate Change Coordinator,  Greenhouse Unit, Papua New Guinea Office of Environment and  Conservation, described the preparation of the initial national  communication, which was the first project supported by UNDP/GEF  NEX. She identified the institutional arrangement as a constraint,  including lack of clarity over the roles of, and cooperation  between, the executing agency, the implementing agency, and UNDP.  She also suggested that the arrangement had hindered the use of  available trained personnel and experts outside the government,  and said the national technical committee members were not paid,  and were therefore not willing to work. She also observed that  climate change was not regarded as a government priority and that  awareness was low.

On technical constraints, she identified a lack of adequate data  and problems related to accessing data. She also drew attention to  a lack of resources, methods and tools for V&A, as well as for  RSO. On mitigation, she highlighted the lack of information on  emission factors and mitigation options, and said awareness with  regard to climate change was low among government officials as  well as the general public. She concluded by noting that, due to  the institutional constraints in the project, more emphasis should  be placed on subcontracting experts, and expressed the hope that  work would improve as awareness increases. She also suggested that  improved working relations between the government and UNDP would  be of value.

### IRAN

Mohammad Soltanich, National Project Manager, Iranian  Climate Change Office, presented on problems and constraints  related to preparing Iran's initial national communication. On  institutional arrangements, he highlighted that government and  non-governmental groups had had no prior experience with such  work, and that the orientation process took some time. He  indicated that the work involved eight ministries, the Department  of Environment, research and educational institutions and the  country's meteorology agency. He noted that the project was  difficult to manage, since it involved 50 people. He outlined  problems with coordination and said the collection of activity  data had been difficult because most of the necessary information  was not part of national statistics. He stressed that  environmental impact assessments, required by law in Iran for all  projects, could also provide an opportunity for carrying out  climate change assessments, a concept with which most policy- makers are unfamiliar.

On technical problems and constraints related to preparing  national inventories, he noted the many inconsistencies and  contradictions in the activity data, and the lack of national  emission factors as two constraints. On V&A, he underscored good  studies on water resources in Iran.

Regarding abatement options, he informed delegates that climate  change was not a concern in national development plans, but that  some plans were consistent with recommendations on climate change  actions. On education, training, and public awareness, he said  organizing workshops had been time-consuming. He drew attention to  a lack of formal education on climate change in Iran, noting that  only limited research projects have been carried out on climate  change science, mitigation, and V&A. He suggested a regional  research and educational center be established in the Middle East.  On availability of resources, he outlined problems with equipment  and logistics, lack of human resources, problems with timely  payment of salaries, and access to international experts. He  concluded by noting that Iran is prepared to submit its national  communication, and has received GEF top-up funds to continue into  phase two of the project.

### SOUTH AFRICA

Lorraine Lotter, Executive Director, Chemical &  Allied Industries Association, South Africa, spoke on the  difficulties South Africa encountered while preparing its national  communication. The problems and constraints included slow funding  approval from GEF, poor accessibility of relevant information,  lack of prioritization of climate change issues, inadequate  coordination among government departments, lack of specific  climate change expertise, and reluctance among individuals to  submit poor quality data. She identified several strategies  undertaken to overcome these difficulties, including increasing  the political commitment to climate change, improving government  coordination, linking climate change to sustainable development,  extending existing expertise in fields relevant to climate change,  and allowing for a review of the draft communication by all  government departments. She remarked that government departments  and the National Committee on Climate Change, a multi-stakeholder  group, have reviewed and approved the final draft of the national  communication, and that it will be submitted shortly. She noted  that current initiatives following on from preparing the national  communication include using the upcoming World Summit on  Sustainable Development (WSSD) to raise awareness, and drafting a  CDM investment strategy and a climate change response strategy.

### PARAGUAY

Lilian Portillo, Director, Climate Change Programme,  Environment Secretariat of Paraguay, described the experiences and  institutional arrangements for dealing with climate change in  Paraguay. Noting that the country had just submitted its national  communication, she provided a brief overview of problems and  constraints. She indicated that on a technical level, the country  lacked reliable data and data accessibility, and that insufficient  data existed to enable an evaluation of different emissions  scenarios. She stressed the need for deeper study in sectors such  as forestry, agriculture and human settlements, and suggested that  there was not enough political support for climate change work and  that the political climate was unstable. She drew attention to a  lack of stakeholder involvement and insufficient funding for  analysis in areas including water resources and vulnerable  ecosystems. She highlighted the lack of coordination between  institutions and the absence of clearly defined roles, leading to  overlaps and unnecessary competition for resources. She concluded  by calling for: better coordination between institutions to  optimize the use of resources and capacities; continuity of  initiatives regardless of political changes; evaluation of the  national climate change initiatives; and development of a national  compliance and enforcement programme.

## WORKING GROUP SESSIONS

Participants attending the CGE workshop divided into four Working  Groups on the afternoon of Wednesday, 10 April, and continued to  work in these groups throughout Thursday morning, 11 April,  reconvening in Plenary on Thursday afternoon. In his introduction  to the Working Group sessions, CGE Chair Philip Weech said each  Working Group would be coordinated by a CGE member and facilitated  by the Secretariat, and indicated that each group should also  select a rapporteur. He said the Working Groups would consider the  CGE group reports from the Panama workshop, as well as the third  compilation and synthesis report of non-Annex I national  communications, in order to make a judgment as to whether the  conclusions of the Panama report remained valid in light of the  experience gained. He also suggested that the groups take up the  matter of difficulties and constraints. He said the results of  these discussions would be noted by the rapporteurs and produced  as an informational document for the next session of the UNFCCC  subsidiary bodies, in June 2002.

### GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORIES WORKING GROUP

Ayité-lo Ajavon (Togo)  chaired the Working Group on greenhouse gas inventories. The  Working Group considered conclusions from the Panama workshop,  relating to:institutional issues - preparation and reporting of  inventories; technical issues - collection of activity data and  development of local and/or regional emissions factors; methodological issues - revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines; use of the UNFCCC Guidelines; financial and technological needs and constraints; and recommendations relating to all of the above.

In their consideration of the conclusions of the Panama workshop,  delegates took into account analyses of greenhouse gas inventories  based on non-Annex I national communications since the Panama  workshop, prepared by the Secretariat in the form of matrices  displaying different issues contained in the reports on a country- by-country basis to allow inter-country comparison, as well as the  presentations they heard earlier in the day.

Providing general comments, the UNFCCC Secretariat and others  noted that there was little contained in the new national  communications that would contradict the conclusions from the  Panama workshop, although more detail could be added from these  new reports. Brazil stressed that the situation in each country is  unique and cautioned against making very specific recommendations,  while Chair Ajavon called for flexibility and a contextual  understanding of the needs of different countries. Many delegates  urged a substantive discussion rather than a focus on textual  details.

On institutional issues relating to the preparation and reporting  of inventories, some delegates supported defining the resources  countries need in order to collect the necessary activity data for  estimating greenhouse gas emissions, stressing that these  resources are human, technical and financial.

On technical details relating to the collection of activity data  and development of local and/or regional emission factors, Iran  called for more information on the source and method of  calculation of the IPCC emission factors to allow countries to  evaluate the certainty and appropriateness of the default figures.  Ghana pointed to deviations between developed and developing  countries in terms of typical emission factors and called for the  development of emission factors more appropriate to national  circumstances in non-Annex I countries. The IPCC cautioned that  information additional to that already provided would be difficult  to produce, but said it is doing what it can to improve the  figures. Chair Ajavon said that as the emission factors always  contain a degree of uncertainty it is better to use national or  regional rather than default figures where possible. Chile  supported adding reference to country-specific issues, such as the  need for data on the fishing industry in Peru or steppe fires in  Mongolia.

On recommendations under this topic, the IPCC clarified that  developing a database on emission factors, as recommended at the  Panama workshop, referred to an IPCC database. He noted that only  one such database currently exists, but said the intention was to  regionalize it at a later date. Iran and others called for a  recommendation for regional projects to develop regional emission  factors that are technology specific. China emphasized that  activity data cannot be required when countries do not have the  capacity for producing it. Brazil noted that it is up to each  country to define the extent of its capacity in this regard, and  said this should not be externally imposed.

On methodological issues relating to the revised 1996 IPCC  Guidelines, delegates proposed including new examples drawn from  the national communications submitted since the Panama workshop.  However, they indicated that in all other respects, the Panama  workshop conclusions could be considered still valid. Regarding  methodological issues related to the energy sector in non-Annex I  countries, Iran proposed adding 'coal' to 'gas and oil' in a  comment noting that specific conditions of fugitive methane  emissions are not taken into account in the IPCC Guidelines. He  also proposed reference to both 'hot and cold flaring' rather than  just flaring. Uruguay said it should be noted that not all  countries use both the sectoral and default approaches, and that  even if they do, some do not compare them. In response to a  comment from Colombia, the UNFCCC Secretariat noted that the IPCC  is currently working to improve the Guidelines with regard to the  forestry and land use sector. Some delegates shared their  experiences with the use of the guidelines in this sector. The  Secretariat proposed that a paragraph should be added on  encouraging Parties to develop methods for specific sectors and  industries for inclusion in the next revision of the IPCC  Guidelines for preparing inventories.

On the use of the UNFCCC Guidelines for preparing national  communications, the Secretariat noted that the analysis of their  use would have to be updated to include the national  communications submitted since the Panama workshop. He said,  however, that he did not foresee any substantive changes to the  Panama conclusions. Ghana asked that there be more elaboration on  when Parties should use the 'not available' and 'not obtainable'  notation keys when preparing their national communications.

### V&A AND RSO WORKING GROUP

This working group was chaired by  coordinator Isabelle Niang-Diop (Senegal). After initial  discussion on the relevant documents, participants agreed to work  from the recommendations on V&A and RSO outlined in the report of  the Panama workshop (FCCC/SBI/2001/INF.1), adding new  recommendations and adjusting existing ones. On Wednesday  afternoon, each participant was asked to provide comments on the  presentations heard earlier in the day, as well as to raise  particular points for any further recommendations. Delegates  highlighted the lack of models adapted to national circumstances,  particularly for water resources, and difficulty in using the  MAGICC/SCENGEN scenario software. Countries noted institutional  and bureaucratic problems with executing and funding agencies,  including:limited funding; differing approaches between UNFCCC and GEF; difficulty of communication between governments and UNDP; lack of communication between UNDP as executing agency and  GEF as funding agency; competitive initiatives between the World Bank and the GEF;  and lack of understanding of the topic of climate change within  the UNDP country office.

Change of national government, internal political problems, and  lack of support or understanding of climate change by the  government were also noted as constraints.

Participants observed that lack of national capacity left  assessments deficient, and asked whether international  consultants, or time and effort spent on building local capacity,  should be used. Related to this, participants said training  centers on V&A should be strengthened or, where they did not exist  and were necessary, established. Delegates also noted that  institutional problems between implementing agencies and  governments leading to delays often resulted in less time for  training of local staff, and a tendency to hire international  experts.

In other comments, the weakness of the adaptation sections was  attributed to problems with the methodology for identifying  adaptation measures, and the importance of identifying no-regret  adaptation measures was stressed. Discussants also noted that  extreme events and impacts linked to El Niño and other climatic  phenomena deserved greater attention in the context of climate  variability as a result of climate change.

On Thursday morning, participants reconvened in the working group,  identifying recommendations for each of the following:  institutional arrangements; education, training and research;  technical issues; research and systematic observation;  methodological issues; and financial and technological needs and  constraints.

On institutional arrangements, Morocco stressed that focal points  should not only be considered as one person, but rather as an  institution. Colombia and Belize agreed that if the focal point is  an institution, the likelihood of permanence is greater.  Discussants noted that there are several types of focal points in  each country, including political focal points, technical focal  points, national communication focal points, as well as IPCC focal  points and GEF focal points.

On education, training and research, Belize said the experiences  of preparing the first national communications should be shared  among similar countries to facilitate the preparation of the  second national communications. Regarding courses on V&A, Malaysia  questioned their practicality. Participants agreed that  introducing concepts and skills within existing curricula would  ensure capacity building. Fiji said that regional or subregional  centers for training would be more practical and require training  fewer instructors.

On technical issues, participants addressed the use and challenges  of providing a baseline scenario assuming no climate change, in  addition to the scenario assuming climate change, noting that the  comparison would indicate impacts of climate change. It was  stressed that distinguishing climate change from other  environmental changes is very difficult, and that in many  countries the baseline is already affected by climate change.  Limited understanding of climate change and climate variability  and the difference between these also contributed to making this  task difficult, as did lack of data.

On research and systematic observation, Belize recommended  encouraging the use and identification of climate change  indicators, such as coral reefs. Development of models and  research addressing ENSO, and communication of such research to  groups working on climate change was noted.

On methodological issues, Chair Niang-Diop suggested that  adaptation options were not well addressed, and that this is a  weakness of national communications. She raised questions of how  to address adaptation strategies, how best to cost the options,  and how to integrate these into national development strategies.  Colombia asked whether participants felt that the methodological  tools for assessing adaptation, such as the IPCC guidelines or  UNEP handbook, were sufficient. The Netherlands suggested that  fewer tools would make the work easier, referring to work in the  LDC Expert Group where this approach is being taken for the  development of NAPAs. He said the constraint was not the number of  tools, but rather the lack of capacity to apply them. Discussants  stressed the importance of socioeconomic scenarios for identifying  adaptation options, and recalled that no-regrets adaptation  options are the priority.

In discussing financial and technological needs and constraints,  Colombia stressed that the amount of funding provided by the GEF  for preparing national communications was inadequate, and said her  country had invested national funds totaling more than this amount  to implement V&A. Bilateral or multilateral agencies were  suggested as alternative funders for such work. The Secretariat  noted that in providing additional guidance to the GEF, COP-7 had  included a provision for strengthening vulnerable countries in  Stage I adaptation activities, and that this could be used to  carry out further V&A studies (decision 6/CP.7). Several other  initiatives providing countries with opportunities to carry out  additional V&A studies, beyond the framework of the national  communications, were noted, including the UNEP/GEF Scientific and  Technical Advisory Panel to the GEF (STAP) and other GEF  initiatives.

Participants also addressed the role of the national  communications in providing input for Stage II and III adaptation  activities. Stage I activities include the preparation of national  communications, while Stage II activities identify priorities, and  Stage III activities involve the implementation of adaptation  measures. It was agreed that national communications identify  desirable adaptation options, and in some cases may provide  funders with concrete lists of activities that can be implemented.  The US questioned the relationship between national communications  and implementation of actual projects under the framework of Stage  III. Colombia said national communications can promote funding  from sources besides the GEF. The Netherlands added that the  exercise of preparing a national communication implies a later  move toward Stages II and III. Morocco stressed that the V&A  process should be continuous, but said that within the framework  of the GEF funding for such projects was not possible, for  instance for studying V&A of coastal zones and fisheries. The US  asked how the national communications process could be broadened  to include such additional studies. Participants observed that the  funds could be partitioned among the different sections of the  national communications at the prerogative of the country, but  that the exercise of creating a greenhouse gas inventory was  generally very costly, and V&A was consequently underfunded.  Participants agreed to recommend that funding should be increased  to allow for more comprehensive V&A studies.

### ABATEMENT WORKING GROUP

Editor's Note: This Working Group met in  parallel with the other three groups. For reasons of resource  limitations, the discussions were not covered by the Earth  Negotiations Bulletin. However, the conclusions reached by this  group are reported in the section on Working Group conclusions.

### EDUCATION, TRAINING AND PUBLIC AWARENESS (ETPA) WORKING GROUP

Brian Challenger (Antigua and Barbuda) chaired the ETPA Working  Group. The Group discussed: the difficulties in interpreting the  information provided in national communications; the education,  training and public awareness needed for preparing national  communications; the need to foster interdisciplinary educational  programmes; general training issues; and how public awareness  programmes should target key decision-makers and place climate  change in the context of other environmental challenges. The Group  was guided by the recent CGE report (FCCC/SBI/2001/15), including  information and analyses of non-Annex I communications and  recommendations for the future, information provided in recent  national communications, and the presentation on ETPA from  Wednesday morning.

On interpreting national communications, the Secretariat, with  Chair Challenger and Switzerland, noted that Parties often fail to  distinguish between ongoing and planned programmes, between  general environmental awareness and specific awareness of climate  change, and between educating the general public and training key  decision-makers.

On preparing national communications, Switzerland, with the  Secretariat, characterized a lack of education, training and  public awareness as a major impediment to preparing national  communications. The Secretariat noted that public awareness helps  national coordinators who are preparing national communications to  garner political and technical support. Chair Challenger remarked  that continuing these programmes after a national communication  has been completed will facilitate the preparation of future  national communications.

On education, the Secretariat observed that some national  communications had emphasized a lack of interdisciplinary input  into discussions on environmental issues. The Cook Islands stated  that this can lead to a lack of coordination among government  departments because officials fail to recognize the range of  issues related to climate change. The Secretariat noted that a  number of countries had stressed the need to improve institutional  cooperation between the universities and other research  institutions in teaching on climate change.

On training, the Secretariat, with Switzerland, noted that several  Parties had stressed the importance of keeping policy makers up- to-date with the latest information on climate change. Chair  Challenger highlighted that international meetings can be used to  train government officials. The Cook Islands stressed that  international meetings are particularly important for training  officials from States without universities or other institutions  that provide guidance on writing national communications. Chair  Challenger remarked on the difficulty of training a critical mass  of experts to guide the process of preparing national  communications. Georgia said that while some EIT countries have a  critical mass of experts, they are unable to finance participation  of experts in the climate change process. Switzerland stated that  linking training programmes to specific climate change projects  could enhance their effectiveness.

On public awareness programmes, Chair Challenger noted that some  countries have emphasized community level awareness. Switzerland  observed that in many cases sensitization training of a small  portion of the population is sufficient. Chair Challenger also  suggested that training key decision-makers properly requires  sound scientific understanding of the implications climate change  has for different sectors, and that this scientific understanding  is lacking in non-Annex I Parties. The Secretariat emphasized the  need to build climate change concerns into the mandates of  existing institutions so that these concerns are reflected in  their activities. Swaziland, with the Cook Islands and Chair  Challenger, stated that information on climate change should be  promoted as part of a larger package of environmental and  sustainable development concerns.

## WORKING GROUP SESSION CONCLUSIONS

Workshop participants met in a closing plenary session on Thursday  afternoon, 11 April, to hear reports on the conclusions of the  four working groups.

### GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORIES

Philip Acquah, rapporteur from the  group on national inventories, presented the results of the  discussions in his group. He said the group had considered the  conclusions from the Panama workshop paragraph-by-paragraph. On  institutional issues for the preparation and reporting of  inventories, the group had decided to clarify the mutual  reinforcement between the preparation of inventories and national  sustainable development plans, and had noted that the GEF has  funded only two regional projects aimed at improving non-Annex I  countries' capacities with regard to developing activity data and  local and regional emission factors. The group added a  recommendation that technical coordinators with a clear mandate  and resources for performing their functions should be designated  for the preparation of greenhouse gas inventories. This  recommendation was based on the presentations describing the  difficulties experienced with the UNDP/GEF NEX projects.

On technical and methodological issues related to the collection  of activity data and development of local and/or regional emission  factors, Acquah said the group had noted the need to strengthen  data collection and the use of national expertise to develop  projects for relevant country specific data.

On financial and technological needs and constraints, he presented  the group's proposal that support should be provided for further  UNDP/GEF regional and subregional projects aimed at improving  countries' ability to choose, process and archive activity data,  and at developing local and regional emission factors, as  appropriate.

In the ensuing discussion, Chile added that data collection should  be enhanced for country-specific sectors such as the fish  processing industry in Peru and the sugar cane industry in Cuba.  Belize stressed the importance of developing emission factors for  small aircraft, which would be worldwide rather than country  specific. The US supported the idea of developing unique country  specific source categories using national expertise and then  publishing the methodology for inclusion in the IPCC database.  Malaysia stressed that non-Annex I countries should not be  burdened with new commitments, as in the case of explaining the  gaps between the use of sectoral and reference approaches for  estimating emissions.

### V&A AND RSO

Mahendra Kumar (Fiji), speaking as rapporteur of this  Working Group, outlined the recommendations identified by the  group. He noted the institutional difficulties affecting the  preparation and completion of the V&A reports, highlighting  participants' suggestions that these difficulties were relevant to  the entire national communication process, and their agreement of  the need to include text on this in the chapeau of the document,  so as to address all sections of the national communications.  Regarding institutional arrangements, he explained that the group  had recommended greater efficiency by the focal point, and had  argued that the focal point should be seen as an institution  rather than an individual. On education, training, and research,  he said the group had recommended encouraging organizations to  provide additional methodologies for impact assessments and/or for  studies on coastal zones, fisheries, human settlements,  desertification, forestry and other ecosystems. He also noted the  recommendation to share experiences between countries with similar  national circumstances. On technical issues, he noted the  discussion in the group addressing the difficulty in noting  distinction in national communications between impacts from  climate change and impacts from other forces, and the  recommendation that countries provide more detailed baseline  scenarios.

On RSO, he highlighted the need for: particular attention to be  given to monitoring climate change indicators; the development of  national research on climate change, including scenarios,  modeling, socioeconomic and integrated assessments, and impacts of  climate change on large scale oceanographic circulation like ENSO  and extreme events; and better communication and information from  the research community. On methodological issues, he underscored  the discussion on providing a description of scenarios with and  without climate change. He noted that socioeconomic scenarios are  useful if linked to climate change scenarios. He said the group  had agreed that systematic formulation of adaptation is often  lacking, without cost-estimation and cost-efficiency analysis.  Similarly, there is a need for better tools to formulate  adaptation strategies, and emphasis should be given to no-regret  options. In conclusion, on financial and technological needs and  constraints, he noted that the level of funding for national  communications needs to be increased significantly to allow for  more comprehensive V&A studies. This includes funding for pilot  and/or demonstration projects, as well as actual projects.

### ABATEMENT

Vute Wangwacharakul (Thailand), who chaired this  working group, presented the issues and problems and  recommendations from the group. He highlighted participants'  comments that issues and problems included the lack of distinction  made between the supply- and demand-side options in the energy  sector. He also noted statements that institutional factors and  lack of project management were serious constraints.

He outlined various recommendations, including that Parties should  be encouraged to consider linkages between inventories and  possible abatement options. He highlighted proposals that  baselines should be constructed, and that guidelines should  include advice to report on the status of options. In addition, he  drew attention to the group's recommendation that implementing  agencies should include appropriate sequencing of activities, and  that local implementing agencies should be able to provide  technical support. Finally, he noted support for cross-sectoral  coordination among sectors in the identification of abatement  options, since this is practical for attracting funding.

On financial and technological needs and constraints, he indicated  that these should be incorporated into the implementation of the  relevant COP-7 decisions. He reported the group's recommendation  that the CGE evaluate the TTClear website (technology transfer  information clearinghouse website), and asked Parties to provide  feedback on it. He noted concern regarding the discontinuation of  the UNDP/GEF National Communications Support Programme (NCSP), and  recommended an alternative programme. Finally, he recommended  speedy implementation of the additional guidance on financial  resources to the financial entity, as well as the special climate  change fund addressing energy, transport, industry, agriculture,  forestry and waste management.

The Secretariat noted that no official confirmation of the  discontinuation of the NCSP has been given, and said that many  decisions from COP-7 included reference to such an entity,  implying that it may resurface in some form.

### EDUCATION, TRAINING AND PUBLIC AWARENESS

Diane McFadzien (Cook  Islands), ETPA Working Group rapporteur, presented the group's  draft recommendations. These included providing financial and  technical support for the following activities:integrating climate change into environmental and sustainable  development education initiatives, in both formal and non-formal  education systems and at all levels; increasing environmental awareness among stakeholders  involved in preparing national sustainable development and  environmental plans; increasing the awareness of climate change issues among  decision makers involved in preparing national communications; and providing targeted training to policy and decision makers so  that they may appreciate the relevance of climate change to the  effective implementation of policies and programmes across all  sectors of society.

### CLOSING REMARKS

Following the presentations from the working  groups, CGE Chair Weech drew the workshop to a close at 5:40 pm,  thanking participants for their hard work and applauding the  success of the workshop.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR BEFORE COP-8

### THE BEIJING FORUM FOR NEW AND EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES AND  SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

This Forum is scheduled to take place  from 15-17 April 2002, in Beijing, China. The purpose of the  meeting is to promote the role of business-science partnership in  utilizing new and emerging technologies for sustainable  development. For more information, contact: UN DESA; tel: +1-212- 963-8798; e-mail: makk@un.org; Internet:  http://www.johannesburgsummit.org/html/calendar/meeting.docs/beiji ng.pdf

### ASIA BIO-FUELS 2002 CONFERENCE

This meeting will be held from 22- 23 April 2002, in Singapore. It will address the development of  bio-fuels projects in Asia, including case studies, analysis of  the economic and social benefits from bio-fuels application, and  evaluation of technology options for fast track project  implementation. For more information, contact: Juliana Lim; tel:  +65-732-1970; fax: +65-733-5087; e-mail:  juliana.lim@ibcasia.com.sg; Internet:  http://www.ibc-asia.com/biofuels.htm

### UPCOMING CLIMATE CHANGE WORKSHOPS

A number of climate change  workshops will be held prior to the 16th session of the UNFCCC  subsidiary bodies. These include the following:Expert meeting on methodologies for technology needs  assessments, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 23 - 25 April 2002; Workshop on the status of modelling activities to assess the  adverse effects of climate change and impacts of response  measures, Bonn, Germany, 16 - 18 May 2002; Workshop on cleaner or less greenhouse gas-emitting energy,  Whistler, Canada, 7 - 8 May 2002; Workshop to develop a work programme on activities related to  Article 6 of the Convention, (Date and venue to be confirmed); Pre-sessional consultations on registries, Bonn, Germany, 2 -  3 June 2002; and Pre-sessional workshop on the draft revised uniform reporting  format for activities implemented jointly, Bonn, Germany, 2 - 3  June 2002.

For more information, contact: UNFCCC Secretariat; tel: +49-228- 815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.int;  Internet: http://www.unfccc.int

### CONFERENCE ON EU AND GERMAN CLIMATE POLICY - CHALLENGES BEFORE THE  ENTRY INTO FORCE OF THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

This meeting will be held  from 6-8 May 2002, in Hamburg, Germany. Organized by the Hamburg  Institute of International Economics, the conference will focus on  the ratification of the Kyoto Protocol in the EU, challenges with  regard to EU national climate strategies, internal EU emissions  trading, integration of EU accession countries, the role of the  Kyoto mechanisms, and EU strategies for achieving entry into  force. For more information, contact: Axel Michaelowa, Hamburg  Institute of International Economics; tel: +49-404-283-4309; fax:  +49-404-283-4451; e-mail: michaelowa@hwwa.de; Internet:  http://www.hwwa.de/climate.htm

### CONFERENCE AND WORKSHOP ON CLIMATE VARIABILITY AND CHANGE AND  THEIR HEALTH EFFECTS IN THE CARIBBEAN

This conference will take  place from 21-25 May 2002. in Bridgetown, Barbados. The conference  is being sponsored by the Pan-American Health Organization and the  WHO under the auspices of the Interagency Network on Climate and  Human Health. Participants will consider climate variability and  climate change, linkages between climate and human health, and  public health policies and strategies for adaptation to climate  variability and change. For more information, contact the Pan- American Health Organization, tel: +1-(246) 426-3860; fax: +1- (246) 436-9779; e-mail: cpcadmin@cpc.paho.org; Internet:  http://www.cpc.paho.org

### FOURTH SESSION OF THE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE WSSD

PrepCom  IV will take place from 24 May - 7 June 2002, in Bali, Indonesia.  Regional group consultations are scheduled for 24 May and  informal-informals for 25-26 May. PrepCom IV will also include  Multi-Stakeholder Dialogues and a Ministerial Segment, and is  expected to complete the document on review of Agenda 21, with  recommendations for further action, and develop a concise  political document, to be submitted to the WSSD. For more  information, contact: Mr. Andrey Vasilyev, DESA; tel: +1-212-963- 5949; fax: +1-212-963-4260; e-mail: vasilyev@un.org; Major groups  contact: Ms. Zehra Aydin-Sipos, DESA; tel: +1-212-963-8811; fax:  +1-212-963-1267; e-mail: aydin@un.org; Internet:  http://www.johannesburgsummit.org/

### 16TH SESSION OF THE UNFCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES

SB-16 will take  place in Bonn, Germany, from 3-14 June 2002. For more information,  contact: UNFCCC Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815-1000; fax: +49-228- 815-1999; e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.int; Internet:  http://www.unfccc.int

### WORLD SUMMIT ON SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

The World Summit on  Sustainable Development will take place from 26 August - 4  September 2002, in Johannesburg, South Africa. For more  information, contact: Mr. Andrey Vasilyev, DESA; tel: +1-212-963- 5949; fax: +1-212-963-4260; e-mail: vasilyev@un.org; Major groups  contact: Ms. Zehra Aydin-Sipos, DESA; tel: +1-212-963-8811; fax:  +1-212-963-1267; e-mail: aydin@un.org; Internet:  http://www.johannesburgsummit.org/

### EIGHTH CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE UNFCCC

COP-8 is scheduled  to take place from 23 October - 1 November 2002, in New Delhi,  India. For more information contact: UNFCCC Secretariat; tel: +49- 228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail:  secretariat@unfccc.int; Internet: http://www.unfccc.int/