---
title: "HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE MEETINGS OF THE FCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES, MONDAY, 7 JUNE 1999"
id: enb12106e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12106e
date: 1999-06-07
abstract: "The Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) held a morning  session to discuss arrangements for intergovernmental meetings,  including arrangements for COP-5 and COP-6. Contact groups were  convened on: the Protocol mechanisms; Annex I communications;  non-Annex I communications; and land use, land-use change and  forestry. Informal consultations were held on emissions  resulting from fuel used for international transport."
---

# SBI

On arrangements for COP-5, SBI Rapporteur Klaus Radunsky  (Austria) reported on ongoing informal consultations on dates  for COP-5 and on the timing and nature of the high-level  segment. He outlined two alternative proposals on arrangements  for COP-5 and noted that, while both scheduled the beginning of  the session for 25 October 1999, one entails a Committee of the  Whole (COW) while the other excludes it. He said options for the  high-level segment are 1-2 November and 4-5 November. On topics  for the high-level segment, he said two options were being  discussed. The first proposes the high-level segment to address,  inter alia: experiences; key issues; challenges with regard to  innovative, efficient and state-of-the-art technologies;  policies and measures; and the Protocol mechanisms, as well as  ways and means of promoting their development. The second  proposes an exchange of views on the short- and long-term  development of the Convention and the Protocol, including the  implementation of the Buenos Aires Plan of Action (BAPA).

The G-77/CHINA tabled a draft decision on arrangements for COP- 5. He indicated that, inter alia: no 'contentious' or  'extraneous' issues should be included in COP-5's agenda; no COW  need be formed; the high-level segment should take place from 3- 4 November; and Ministers and heads of delegation should  participate on an equal footing. He recommended that the high- level segment address the state of implementation of the BAPA  and the early entry into force of the Protocol. The EU called  for dynamic interaction among heads of delegation during the  high-level segment, rather than lengthy statements. CHINA,  supported by SAUDI ARABIA, QATAR and KUWAIT, inquired about the  meaning of 'long-term implementation of the Convention' as a  discussion topic and said the high-level segment should focus on  reviewing the state of implementation of the BAPA. The EU, with  the US, noted the need for more consultations on arrangements  for COP-5. JAPAN accepted most of the G-77/CHINA's suggestions,  except on timing for the high-level segment. He emphasized COP- 5's role in building momentum towards COP-6.

The NETHERLANDS announced its offer to host COP-6 in the Hague  and said it was up to Parties to decide whether it should take  place in 2000 or 2001. He drew attention to significant  financial implications for the host country if an early decision  is not taken. The US noted its preference to hold COP-6 in 2001  in view of the work required to solve pending issues, including  the Protocol mechanisms, compliance procedures and LULUCF. He  proposed two sessions of the subsidiary bodies to take place  between COP-5 and COP-6. AUSTRALIA said that since COP-6 had  important decisions to take it should be held early in 2001.  CANADA noted the importance of setting the technical foundation  of decisions on issues such as technology transfer, the  mechanisms and compliance. He said there should be ample  opportunities for subsidiary body discussions in 2000, which may  affect the dates for COP-6.The G-77/CHINA preferred scheduling  COP-6 in October or November 2000, and objected to additional  intersessional meetings of the subsidiary bodies. KUWAIT and  LEBANON stressed that the COPs should be held on a yearly basis.  The EU expressed its flexibility on the timing of COP-6 but  underscored the need for a prompt decision to permit the  Netherlands sufficient time for preparations. Chair Kante  requested John Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda) to undertake informal  consultations and report back to the SBI.

The Executive Secretary said the Secretariat had scaled down its  plans for the biennium 2000-2001, given the reaction to its  budget, but added that no corresponding scaling down had  occurred in the expectations of delegates. He indicated that  conclusions emerging from the contact groups envisaging activity  in the budget period 2000-2001 should include a qualifier  referencing the forthcoming decision on the programme budget.

# CONTACT GROUPS AND INFORMAL CONSULTATIONS

### Emissions from international transport

Jose Romero  (Switzerland) conducted informal consultations on the draft  conclusions on emissions resulting from fuel used for  international transportation. Delegates called for clarity  regarding what SBSTA-11 will consider and agreed to delete a  reference to SBSTA forwarding a draft decision to COP-5. They  discussed extensively an informal report by the Secretariat that  was distributed during a SBSTA session. Issues raised included:  whether the report had or will have the status of a technical  report; what decision initiated it; and how to proceed with its  review and revision. They also considered including a chapeau  outlining the decisions calling for further work, and including  language noting that the Convention is the framework under which  action will be taken. Chair Romero will re-draft the relevant  paragraphs and circulate a revised draft.

### Joint contact group on mechanisms:

The G-77/CHINA requested more  time to formulate its position. He said the group was focusing  on the clean development mechanism (CDM) and that the three  mechanisms should be addressed in sequence, as they are  different in nature and scope. He noted that the synthesis of  proposals does not reflect the idea that principles be addressed  first. NORWAY, on behalf of the Umbrella Group (a fluid grouping  of non-EU Annex I countries), expressed regret that G-77/China  was not prepared. He said the BAPA had requested SBSTA to  consider all three mechanisms and prioritize the CDM. Supported  by the EU, he suggested starting with discussions on the CDM but  also allocating time to consider the other mechanisms. The EU  stated that although the mechanisms may be distinct, a number of  similar issues exist. After consultations with representatives  of the regional groups, Chair Chow adjourned the meeting until  Tuesday morning.

### Annex I Communications:

The contact group on Annex I  communications convened in afternoon and evening sessions to  consider the following documents: the draft decision on  guidelines and the schedule for Annex I communications; draft  SBSTA and SBI conclusions on Annex I communications guidelines;  draft guidelines on inventories; and notes on the common  reporting format (CRF).

Regarding the draft decision on guidelines and the schedule, the  group accepted a number of amendments, including, inter alia: a  preambular sentence proposed by Switzerland noting the ongoing  process of improvement in reporting guidance to Parties,  particularly through the IPCC's work on uncertainties and good  practice in managing inventories; and the EU's insertion of  'annual' inventory reporting. The group accepted an amended  draft of the SBSTA and SBI conclusions on guidelines for Annex I  communications. On the draft guidelines on inventories, the  group concluded its discussion after accepting several  amendments, including, inter alia: deleting a paragraph with  definitions of the terms 'shall' and 'should;' and inserting a  sentence noting that the CRF is part of the national inventory  report. In its evening session, the group accepted the notes on  the CRF as amended.

### Non-Annex I Communications:

The non-Annex I communications  contact group met in an evening session and exchanged  preliminary views on a draft decision submitted by the EU. The  EU said the intent of the decision is to improve the quality of  communications and address some of the constraints faced by non- Annex I countries. He underlined learning from experiences  gained while preparing initial communications and making  progress towards guidelines for non-Annex I second  communications as the EU's main concerns. He highlighted the  usefulness of open, transparent and non-confrontational  technical assessment of non-Annex I communications. He indicated  that the IPCC Inventory Task Force could be requested to develop  a work plan to prepare a comprehensive database on regional  emission factors. The G-77/CHINA pointed to inconsistencies  between the draft decision and previous COP decisions on  providing guidance to the operating entity of the financial  mechanism. She questioned the IPCC's capacity to gather country- specific information. The US said it supported many of the  points in the EU's text, particularly on the usefulness of  technical feedback and the need to develop guidelines for second  national communications. TOGO noted that it was premature to  think about guidelines for second communications as most non- Annex I countries were still preparing their first. MEXICO said  financial support should be available not only for vulnerability  assessment but also for mitigation and adaptation efforts.  SWITZERLAND emphasized the need to identify problems with the  preparation of inventories. The group decided to invite the IPCC  Inventory Task Force to give a brief presentation on its work  and continue discussing the proposed draft decisions at the next  session.

### LULUCF

The LULUCF contact group met in the afternoon to  consider draft conclusions that contained a compilation of  additional proposals by Parties based on ideas emerging from the  group's earlier discussions. Participants agreed to wording for  paragraphs that, inter alia: invites Parties to review questions  in the SBSTA document on LULUCF methodological issues and  requests them to provide submissions on these topics, where  possible electronically, for consideration at SBSTA-11; and  further considers, at SBSTA-11, the process and timing for the  analysis of information provided by the IPCC Special Report on  LULUCF and the process of developing the work programme. The  group had not completed its work by the meeting's scheduled  conclusion, and elected to continue deliberations into the  night.

# IN THE CORRIDORS

With a plea for prayers for the G-77/China negotiators  attempting to agree on an internal position on the Protocol  mechanisms, the joint contact group on mechanisms was adjourned  yet again by Chair Chow. The repeated adjournments prompted one  observer to speculate that the 'G' in G-77 should come to  signify 'Godot,' as in 'Waiting for Godot.' Some reported that  the G-77/China is experiencing difficulty with the 'nature and  scope' of the CDM itself, including what it constitutes, whether  certified emission reductions should be 'tradeable' and whether  a portion of project proceeds should go towards an 'adaptation'  fund. Some participants suggested that with few opportunities to  meet intersessionally and an unwillingness to dissolve into  regional positions, the G-77/China might be unable to agree on a  comprehensive position in time for serious discussion at this  meeting. Some suggested that the Secretariat could help by  playing a more 'facilitative role' in promoting intersessional  dialogue between Parties within the G-77/China. Against the  backdrop of heated budget discussions and the fiscal discipline  being demanded of the Secretariat, this may well be a tall  order, leaving some observers wondering at the best way forward.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY

## Joint contact group on mechanisms

This group will meet at 10:00  am in the Beethoven Room.

Joint Working Group on compliance: The JWG will meet at 3:00 pm  in the Beethoven Room.