---
title: "SUMMARY OF THE WORKSHOP ON BEST PRACTICES IN POLICIES AND MEASURES: 11-13 APRIL 2000"
id: enb12126e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12126e
date: 2000-04-13
abstract: "The Workshop on Best Practices in Policies and Measures under the  Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC) was held from 11-13  April 2000, at the Eigtvedts Pakhus, Ministry of Foreign Affairs,  Copenhagen, Denmark. The Workshop aimed to: clarify the concept of  best practices in policies and measures; identify the criteria  used by countries to select, monitor and evaluate these practices;  and enable countries to improve and enhance their reporting on  best practice policies and measures."
---

The workshop was co-sponsored by Denmark and France and organized  by the FCCC Secretariat in cooperation with the Chair of the  Subsidiary Body on Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA).  Over 140 participants attended, including representatives of  governments, inter-governmental organizations (IGOs) non- governmental organizations (NGOs) and local governmental  organizations (LGOs). Participants met in seven working groups to  discuss national programmes, cross-cutting issues, indicators,  methodological and institutional issues and best practices in  policies and measures to address CO2 emissions from energy supply  and industry, CO2 emissions from transport, household and  commercial sectors, and emissions of non-CO2 gases from energy,  industry, agriculture, forestry and waste. A Chair's report of the  Workshop will be presented to SBSTA-12, scheduled for 12-16 June  2000 in Bonn.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FCCC AND THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

The FCCC was adopted on 9 May 1992, and was opened for signature  at the UN Conference on Environment and Development in June 1992.  It entered into force on 21 March 1994, 90 days after receipt of  the 50th ratification. It has currently received 181 instruments  of ratification.

### COP-1

The first Conference of the Parties to the FCCC (COP-1)  took place in Berlin from 28 March - 7 April 1995. In addition to  addressing a number of important issues related to the future of  the FCCC, delegates reached agreement on the adequacy of  commitments and adopted the 'Berlin Mandate.' Delegates agreed to  establish an open-ended Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate (AGBM)  to begin a process toward appropriate action for the period beyond  2000, including the strengthening of Annex I Parties' commitments  through the adoption of a protocol or another legal instrument.  COP-1 also requested the Secretariat to make arrangements for  sessions of the subsidiary bodies on scientific and technological  advice (SBSTA) and implementation (SBI). SBSTA serves as the link  between the information provided by competent international  bodies, and the policy-oriented needs of the COP. SBI was created  to develop recommendations to assist the COP in the review and  assessment of the implementation of the Convention and in the  preparation and implementation of its decisions.

Ad Hoc GROUP ON THE BERLIN MANDATE: The AGBM met eight times  between August 1995 and COP-3 in December 1997. During the first  three sessions, delegates focused on analyzing and assessing what  the possible policies and measures to strengthen the commitments  of Annex I Parties could be, how Annex I countries might  distribute or share new commitments and whether commitments should  take the form of an amendment or a protocol. AGBM-4, which  coincided with COP-2 in Geneva in July 1996, completed its in- depth analysis of the likely elements of a protocol and States  appeared ready to prepare a negotiating text. At AGBM-5, in  December 1996, delegates recognized the need to decide whether to  permit Annex I Parties (developed country Parties and Parties with  economies in transition) to use mechanisms that would give them  flexibility in meeting their quantified emissions limitation and  reduction objectives (QELROs).

As the protocol was drafted during the sixth and seventh sessions  of the AGBM, in March and August 1997, respectively, delegates  streamlined a framework compilation text by merging or eliminating  some overlapping provisions within the myriad of proposals. Much  of the discussion centered on a proposal from the EU for a 15% cut  in a basket of three greenhouse gases (GHG) by the year 2010  compared to 1990 emissions levels. In October 1997, as AGBM-8  began, US President Bill Clinton called for 'meaningful  participation' by developing countries in the negotiating position  he announced in Washington. In response, the G-77/China distanced  itself from attempts to draw developing countries into agreeing to  new commitments.

### COP-3

The Third Conference of the Parties (COP-3) was held from  1-11 December 1997 in Kyoto, Japan. Over 10,000 participants,  including representatives from governments, IGOs, NGOs and the  media, attended the Conference, which included a high-level  segment featuring statements from over 125 ministers. Following  intense formal and informal negotiations, Parties to the FCCC  adopted the Kyoto Protocol on 11 December 1997.

In the Protocol, Annex I Parties to the FCCC agreed to commitments  with a view to reducing their overall emissions of six GHGs by at  least 5% below 1990 levels between 2008 and 2012. The Protocol  also established emissions trading, Joint Implementation (JI)  between developed countries, and a Clean Development Mechanism  (CDM) to encourage joint emissions reduction projects between  developed and developing countries. To date, 84 countries have  signed and 22 have ratified the Protocol. The Protocol will enter  into force 90 days after it is ratified by 55 States, including  Annex I Parties representing at least 55% of the total carbon  dioxide (CO2) emissions for 1990.

### COP-4

The Fourth Conference of the Parties (COP-4) was held from  2-13 November 1998 in Buenos Aires, Argentina, with over 5,000  participants in attendance. During the two-week meeting, delegates  deliberated decisions for the COP during SBI-9 and SBSTA-9. Issues  related to the Protocol were considered in joint SBI/SBSTA  sessions. A high-level segment, which heard statements from over  100 ministers and heads of delegation, was convened on Thursday,  12 November.

Following hours of high-level closed door negotiations and a final  plenary session, delegates adopted the Buenos Aires Plan of Action  (BAPA). Under the BAPA, the Parties declared their determination  to strengthen the implementation of the FCCC and prepare for the  future entry into force of the Protocol. The BAPA contains the  Parties' resolution to demonstrate substantial progress on: the  financial mechanism; the development and transfer of technology;  the implementation of FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9, as well as  Protocol Articles 2.3 and 3.14 (adverse effects); activities  implemented jointly (AIJ); the mechanisms of the Protocol; and the  preparations for the first Conference of the Parties serving as  the meeting of the Parties to the Protocol (COP/MOP-1).

### SBI-10 AND SBSTA-10

The subsidiary bodies to the FCCC held their  tenth sessions in Bonn, Germany, from 31 May - 11 June 1999, and  began the process of fulfilling the BAPA. SBSTA considered topics  such as Annex I communications, methodological issues and the  development and transfer of technology. SBI discussed, inter alia,  administrative and financial matters and non-Annex I  communications. SBI and SBSTA jointly considered the mechanisms of  the Protocol, AIJ and compliance.

### COP-5

The Fifth Conference of the Parties (COP-5) met in Bonn,  Germany, from 25 October - 5 November 1999. With over 3000  participants in attendance and 165 Parties represented, delegates  continued their work toward fulfilling the BAPA. During the two- week meeting, delegates deliberated decisions for the COP during  SBI-11 and SBSTA-11. Ninety-three ministers and other heads of  delegation addressed COP-5 during a high-level segment held from  2-3 November. COP-5 adopted 32 draft decisions and conclusions on,  inter alia, the review of the implementation of commitments and  other FCCC provisions, and preparations for COP/MOP-1.

Denmark offered to host a workshop on policies and measures and  COP-5 accepted the offer in its conclusions and decided to  consider the report of the workshop at SBSTA-12, and report the  results to COP-6. Since COP-5 several other workshops have also  been held in preparation for COP-6.

# REPORT OF THE WORKSHOP

Svend Auken, Minister for Environment and Energy for Denmark,  opened the Workshop on Best Practices in Policies and Measures on  Tuesday, 11 April 2000. He welcomed participants and said the  workshop provided an opportunity to share experiences on policies  and measures. He supported the use of the Kyoto Mechanisms, but  stressed the importance of domestic policies and measures. He said  concrete measures are needed to engage the public in the developed  world, and that technologies should be adapted to conditions in  the South to promote global partnership. He highlighted the Danish  National Climate Change Strategy, saying it had led to  technological advantages and job creation.

Dominique Voynet, Minister for the Environment for France, said  Annex I countries are signaling their commitment to climate change  mitigation by implementing a variety of national policies and  measures. She said that the use of the Kyoto Mechanisms must be  supplemental to domestic action. She stressed the importance of  identifying measures with ancillary economic and social benefits,  as well as the value of developing indicators.

Claire Parker, Coordinator of the Implementation Programme, FCCC  Secretariat, highlighted the Workshop's role as part of the FCCC  process. She noted that policies and measures constitutes one of  several issues scheduled for resolution at COP-6. She noted that a  successful outcome could in part trigger the ratification of the  Kyoto Protocol by Annex I countries, and motivate non-Annex I  countries to participate. She emphasized the links between  policies and measures and the Kyoto Mechanisms through the issue  of supplementarity, and the connection to adverse effects due to  the impacts of mitigation measures. She expressed hope that  discussion at the workshop would define 'best practices' and  consider evaluation criteria and methodological issues including  indicators.

Bert Metz, Co-Chair of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate  Change (IPCC) Working Group III, made a presentation on policies  and measures as a tool to achieve FCCC and Kyoto Protocol  objectives. He drew attention to relevant IPCC reports, including  the Second Assessment Report and special reports on aviation and  the global atmosphere, technology transfer, and emissions  standards. He considered barriers and actions relating to policies  and measures in several economic sectors, and policies designed to  encourage technology transfer. He supported linking sustainable  development strategies with climate mitigation policies. In  considering preparatory work on the IPCC's Third Assessment  Report, he noted the existence of a considerable amount of new  literature on emissions trading and the CDM, but less on other  policies and measures.

Jonathan Pershing, International Energy Agency (IEA), noted that,  given differing national circumstances, the focus should be on  good practices rather than best practices. He categorized policy  actions of countries into several groups including: fiscal  policies and market mechanisms; regulatory policies; research and  development (R&D) policies; and processes where countries are  developing outreach programmes or consultative processes to  develop, review and implement proposed policies. He suggested that  good practice policies should maximize economic efficiency, be  politically feasible, minimize administrative complexity and  costs, and have minimal or positive feedback effects on other  policy areas. He said developing good practice solutions could  include: getting the prices right; utilizing the market;  correcting market failures through other policies; establishing  strong institutions; and focusing on international cooperation.

Ryutaro Yatsu, Global Environment Department, Environmental Agency  of Japan, presented the main conclusions of the Group of Eight  (G8) Environmental Forum on domestic best practices. He noted that  the Forum, held in February 2000 in Japan, had identified and  evaluated best practices, considered barriers to adopting best  practices, and made recommendations for their future development.  The Forum recommended that G8 countries, inter alia: continue  information exchange and evaluations on best practices; employ  comprehensive and integrated policies resulting in multiple  benefits; promote and increase emphasis on community-based  approaches and local initiatives; and make efforts to share  experiences with other countries. The Forum also recommended that  G8 governments involve all stakeholders at an early stage in the  policy development process, and set positive examples in areas  such as green procurement.

## WORKING GROUPS ON BEST PRACTICES IN POLICIES AND MEASURES

Following the opening speeches and presentations, participants met  in seven working groups on 11 and 12 April to hear presentations  and discuss the following: national programmes; cross-cutting  issues; best practices relating to CO2 emissions from energy  supply and industry; best practices relating to transport,  household and commercial sectors; best practices to address  emissions of non-CO2 gases from energy, industry, agriculture,  forestry and waste; indicators used in the assessment of policies  and measures; and methodological and institutional aspects of best  practices.

### NATIONAL PROGRAMMES

The working group on national programmes met  on Tuesday, 11 April, and was chaired by Harald Dovland (Norway).  Gabrielle Edwards, UK Department of Environment, Transport and the  Regions, made a presentation on the UK climate change programme  and examples of best practice. She outlined policies and measures  including:the Non-Fossil Fuel Obligation mechanism requiring  electricity suppliers to purchase a portion of their electricity  from renewable sources; a climate change levy on energy use to encourage business  energy efficiency; a pilot emissions trading scheme; annual increases of the fuel duty; an integrated transport policy that includes legislation to  allow for local congestion charging; a new energy efficiency standards-of-performance scheme for  the domestic sector; and policies and measures relating to non-CO2 gases.

Maciej Sadowski, Polish National Fund for Environmental Protection  and Water Management, drew attention to the special circumstances  of economies in transition with regard to climate policy, energy  and environmental policies. He suggested that policies related to  technological change, financial incentives and market reforms be  undertaken simultaneously. He stressed the importance of improving  energy efficiency, and of considering both total emissions  reductions and emissions intensity improvements. He noted that  emissions have been most successfully reduced in privatized  sectors.

John Lowe, Acting Director General, Energy Policy Branch, Natural  Resources Canada, made a presentation on good practice in policies  and measures in the context of national circumstances. After  considering Canada's situation and experience, he concluded that  no single or universal best practice formula exists for domestic  policies, but he supported exchanging information and sharing  lessons in the development of good practices.

Gwenyth Andrews, Chief Executive Officer, Australian Greenhouse  Office, introduced Australia's Greenhouse Gas Abatement Programme,  which aims at flexible support of the most cost-effective  abatement opportunities across all economic sectors. She said  measures should be: integrated into a comprehensive national  strategy aimed at achieving emissions targets cost-effectively;  tailored to national interests and circumstances; consistent with  other government commitments; equitable; cost-efficient; and able  to provide multiple benefits, based on partnerships involving all  levels of society, and informed by research and best available  knowledge.

Daniela Stoytcheva, Ministry of Environment and Waters, Bulgaria,  highlighted the need to implement a package of climate change  mitigation measures, including administrative, legislative,  economic and educational measures, as well as conduct research on  their application. She said non-technical measures were gaining  importance, and that technical and non-technical measures should  be applied together. She outlined the Bulgarian experience with  AIJ, and said Bulgaria and the Netherlands were about to undertake  three JI projects on district heating and heat supply.

Ryutaro Yatsu, Environmental Agency of Japan, outlined Japan's  legislative framework and coordination mechanism. He said the  Global Warming Prevention Headquarters had been established  following COP-3 and had developed guidelines for specific action  to be undertaken by 2010. The guidelines outlined measures on  energy supply and demand, limiting GHG emissions other than CO2,  promoting measures for CO2 sinks, strengthening research and  development, and fostering international cooperation. Yatsu also  discussed legislative initiatives, including the 1998 law to  promote policy and measures on climate change and recent  amendments to the law on energy use.

Chair Dovland noted a preference among some participants for a  focus on good rather than best practice. While pointing to  similarities in approaches taken by different countries, he noted  that national circumstances must be taken into account. He drew  attention to national programmes' emphasis on the energy,  residential, commercial and transport sectors, as well as the  focus on renewable sources of energy.

In the ensuing discussion, several participants highlighted the  difficulty of implementing effective measures in the transport  sector and some called for 'public acceptance' to be a criteria  for determining good practice in policies and measures.

### CROSS CUTTING ISSUES

The working group on cross cutting issues  met on Tuesday, 11 April, and was chaired by Lambert Gnapelet  (Central African Republic). Marianne Wenning, Deputy Head of Unit,  European Commission, highlighted three sectors where the EU was  considering common and coordinated policies and measures, namely,  energy efficiency, renewables and transport. She highlighted a  list of issues that merited consideration, inter alia: whether the  IPCC framework for evaluating best practices, presented at COP-5,  would provide sufficient guidance; methods to minimize the  influence of national circumstances in best practices; and ways to  ensure that best practices are taken up by other Parties.

On the implementation of Protocol Article 2.1(a)(v) (reduction of  market imperfections), Mohammed Al Sabban, Saudi Arabia, advocated  the progressive reduction or phasing out of market imperfections,  fiscal incentives, tax and duty exemptions and subsidies in all  GHG emitting sectors. He identified several distortions in the  market, including the discriminatory taxation of petroleum  transport fuels compared to other fuels, and the provision of  subsidies to coal and nuclear industries. He stressed the need for  Annex I Parties to design policies and measures to minimize  adverse effects. He said implementation of Protocol Article  2.1(a)(v) should result in:restructuring of Annex B tax systems to reflect GHG content  in all GHG-emitting sectors and removal of subsidies; discouraging the production of fossil fuels in Annex B  countries; discouraging the use of nuclear energy to reflect its  significant externalities; removing existing barriers (political and regulatory) to the  use of more oil in the electricity sector; and encouraging a wider use of CO2 sequestration technologies.

In the ensuing discussion, TUVALU questioned the logic of the  presentation and asked if the recent restrictions by OPEC on its  oil exports could be considered a market imperfection. Al Sabban  responded that it was better for the producers of the product to  tax it than the consumers.

Haroldo de Oliveira Machado Filho, Ministry of Science and  Technology, Brazil, presented on the steps taken in the Brazilian  energy and transportation sectors, focusing on the ethanol and the  energy conservation programme. He said the ethanol programme  employs subsidies to promote the use of hybrid ethanol from sugar  cane as an automotive fuel. The energy conservation programme  promotes the rationalization of electric power production. Its  main objectives are to increase efficiency, reduce consumption,  eliminate waste and ensure the overall reduction of costs and  investments. He forecast that the energy conservation field would  witness: privatization, more competition and participation of  private capital in energy supply, and deverticalization of power  supply Peer Stiansen, Ministry of Environment, Norway, presented on how  economic instruments such as taxes and emissions trading could be  used domestically and internationally to reduce GHG emissions. He  explained that Norway currently taxes 65% of its CO2 emissions,  with different rates for each activity. While taxes address  prices, trading schemes could address emissions quantities. Norway  established its trading scheme in 1998 to ensure compliance with  the Kyoto Protocol. He said that the degree of reliability and  expansion of inventories necessary for a trading scheme needed to  be addressed and stressed the need for a simple system. He called  for linking the scheme to an international one and see how other  countries follow with similar policies.

Kimiko Hirata, Climate Action Network, on behalf of NGOs at the  Workshop, noted that there was significant delay in taking action  in developed countries caused by political inertia, resistance of  some business and international financial institutions and the  possibility of using the Kyoto Mechanisms. She opposed the  inclusion of nuclear power in measures to address climate change.  She suggested several key measures for best practices including  taxes, subsidies and other financial incentives, green  procurement, public awareness, standards and R&D.

Chair Gnapelet asked participants to focus on the appropriate  context for discussion of policies and measures, the concept of  best fit, and the criteria for the determination of cross cutting  issues. The EU stressed the need to reach a common understanding  on the criteria. SAUDI ARABIA highlighted the need to focus not  just on the best practices but also on bad practices with a view  to eliminating them. The ENERGY CHARTER SECRETARIAT pointed out  that cultural differences must be taken into account. The US  suggested that, although many countries agreed on several  elements, these could be attributes of the policies rather than  common criteria.

### BEST PRACTICES TO ADDRESS CO2 EMISSIONS FROM ENERGY SUPPLY AND  INDUSTRY

This working group met on Wednesday, 12 April, and was  chaired by Terry Carrington (UK). Gene McGlynn, OECD, made a  presentation on the lessons from the OECD experience, focusing on  cost effectiveness. He suggested that cost effectiveness  calculations include non-generation costs, lifecycle impacts,  ancillary impacts and allocation of costs, and said deviations  from cost-effectiveness should be transparent. He stated that  measures can be competing or complementary and that subsidy reform  can be significant no-regrets measure. He advocated careful design  of the policy package.

Ole Odgaard, Danish Energy Agency, outlined the Danish green  electricity market, focusing on the green certificate market for  renewable energy. He identified high transaction costs and  possible market distortions due to few market actors as barriers  to the success of a national certificate market. He advocated  instead an international certificate market, which would require,  inter alia: a common certificate procedure; a common definition of  renewables; transparency of national subsidies; quotas in  international trade; and certification of origin, country,  producer, and production date.

Gwen Andrews, Chief Executive of the Australian Greenhouse Gas  Office, gave a presentation on the Australian programme of  efficiency standards for power generation. She said a programme of  efficiency standards was a key measure, as it was a technically- sound approach that balanced both economic and environmental  concerns.

Jeffery Dowd, Senior Policy Analyst, US Department of Energy,  highlighted a few key US policies that embody best practice  qualities and identified several factors underlying these  policies. These include:recognizing sub-sectoral and regional diversity; promoting win-win measures; matching policy designs to key attributes of the end use  markets and technologies; promoting cost-effective implementation; supporting public education and outreach; ensuring accountability; ensuring continuity on long-term changes in technology; facilitating policy coordination at all levels of government;  and providing the industry with a sense of ownership in the  process of technological change and market transformation.

Okko van Aardenne, Ministry of Economic Affairs of the  Netherlands, gave a presentation on Dutch long-term agreements  with industry to achieve energy efficiency. He identified the  characteristics of their long-term agreements, including: targets  for energy-efficiency improvement; yearly reporting by sector  based on monitoring of individual companies; and schemes for  financial stimulation of energy efficiency improvement. He said  long-term agreements work, as the industry is motivated; the  industry's structure and organization is suitable for long-term  agreements; energy saving potential is higher than expected; and  the long-term agreements approach is accepted by environment  authorities.

Meher Aziz Bedrous, Director of Environmental Studies, Egyptian  Electricity Authority, outlined energy efficiency measures  undertaken in Egypt that have been directed at: fully utilizing  hydroelectric power; promoting natural gas; encouraging power  system efficiency; supporting energy conservation; enhancing  renewable energy utilization; and reforming energy prices. He  identified barriers to effective policies and measures, including  a lack of financing mechanisms for energy efficiency and the  absence of government incentives to enhance energy efficiency. He  concluded that only options that have no adverse effect on  economic development should be considered.

Majella Kelleher, Finance and Contracts Manager, Irish Energy  Center, introduced the Irish self-audit scheme. She said companies  involved in the scheme commit to regular energy audits, energy  saving targets and action plans, annual energy statements and  information sharing. Benefits to members include: improved  competitiveness; ease in meeting environmental regulatory  requirements; a platform for positive public relations; and  opportunities for information sharing. Key benefits to the  national programme include cost effectiveness and development of a  set of competences to serve the entire industrial sector.

### BEST PRACTICES TO ADDRESS CO2 EMISSIONS FROM TRANSPORT, HOUSEHOLDS  AND COMMERCIAL SECTORS

This working group took place on  Wednesday, 12 April, and was chaired by Maciej Sadowski (Poland).  Fridtjof Unander and Lewis Fulton, IEA, made a presentation on CO2  emissions trends and reduction opportunities in the transport,  domestic and commercial sectors. Unander noted the existence of  numerous opportunities to reduce emissions, and emphasized the  need for vigorous policy action now, given the time horizon for  meeting Protocol commitments. Fulton considered transportation  options for light duty vehicles, based on case studies of Germany,  Denmark and the US. He suggested fuel consumption-based fees and  rebates and the promotion of next generation technologies.

Jotaro Horiuchi, Deputy Director of the Environmental Division,  Japanese Ministry of Transport, outlined policies and measures in  the transport sector in Japan, focusing on the freight sector. He  noted national support for a shift to shipping and rail, as these  modes emit less CO2 than commercial trucks.

Kevin Green, General Engineer, US Department of Transportation,  discussed the US experience with transport-relevant policies and  measures. He noted that US transportation goals are safety,  mobility, economic growth and trade, a healthy human and national  environment, and national security. He said policies should  contribute to these goals and demonstrate a compelling  cost/benefit ratio. He stated that a fundamental question for  transport policy was the limits of control exercised by  governments.

Britt Wendelboe, Head of the Energy Data and Models,  Transportation and Emergency Preparedness Section of the Danish  Energy Agency, outlined an energy efficiency labeling scheme  introduced in Denmark that ranks all new passenger vehicles based  on fuel efficiency. The scheme allows consumers to compare  different vehicles' fuel efficiency, using an absolute comparison  rather than a ranking by size of car.

Joe Powell, Director of the Atlanta Regional Office of the US  Department of Energy, made a presentation on enhancing energy  efficiency in the US building sector. He described several  relevant US government programmes, including Building America and  the Building Energy Code. He stressed the need for flexibility in  addressing the varying circumstances affecting different regions  within the US. He said best practice will vary in each case.

Jun Arima, Chief Intendant for Energy Efficiency, Ministry of  International Trade and Industry of Japan, described his country's  Top Runner Programme, which is part of its efforts to reach its  GHG emissions targets under the Protocol. He said the programme  sets energy efficiency targets for consumer products based on the  standard set by the most energy efficient model in that product  category. For instance, computers must improve energy efficiency  83% by 2005 from a base year of 1997, while different levels are  set for other products.

In the ensuing discussion, Chair Sadowski took note of  participants' comments that national circumstances were a  significant factor. The IEA stressed that the development of ideas  on good or best practice is an ongoing process. The US said  consensus had not been reached on what constitutes best practices  or what the specific criteria for identifying best practices  should be. JAPAN, supported by the US, said the aim of this  workshop was to share ideas on policies and measures, and  participants will draw their own conclusions on the information  made available. IRELAND noted that best practices generally have  an integrated, multi-faceted approach and are inclusive, cross- sectoral and dynamic.

### BEST PRACTICES TO ADDRESS EMISSIONS OF NON-CO2 GASES FROM ENERGY,  INDUSTRY, AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND WASTE

This working group met  on Wednesday, 12 April, and was chaired by Marianne Wenning (EC).  Leo Meyer, Deputy Head of the Climate Change Department, Ministry  of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment of the  Netherlands, presented best practices in policies and measures to  prevent or limit emissions of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs),  perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and sulfur hexafluoride (SF6). He outlined  the EU's experience and stressed the importance of working on a  national as well as a transnational level to reach emissions  limitation standards. He recommended that the IPCC assist in  improving the data, and highlighted the need to exchange and  disseminate information on alternatives to ozone-depleting  substances. He emphasized the potential application of Protocol  Article 13.4(d) (coordination of measures adopted) in establishing  international actions to limit emissions.

Frank Jensen, Chemicals Division of the Danish Environmental  Protection Agency (EPA) highlighted the Danish proposal for  regulation of HFCs, PFCs and SF6. The Danish plan involves phase- out at specific dates in some new plants and products, while other  uses such as air conditioning in cars and medical inhalers are  allowed 'until further notice.' The proposal is under review by  stakeholders.

Sally Rand, US EPA, presented on the US voluntary regulation  approaches to methane and emissions with high global warming  potential. She highlighted the criteria and characteristics on  which establishment of programmes are based, including: cost  effectiveness; maintenance of health and environmental safety;  close cooperation with industry; and setting technically  aggressive goals. She stressed that the experience of the US could  be considered by other countries.

Christophe Ewald, French Ministry of the Environment, highlighted  two French initiatives, one to reduce nitrous oxide emissions in  nylon production, the other to cut PFC emissions in aluminum  production. The first was based on a local decree mandating the  reduction of nitrous oxide, while the second was a voluntary  agreement with industry. Ewald stressed the importance of: close  cooperation between the local administration and industry; a  comprehensive approach to GHG emissions reduction in the  industrial process; the capture of ancillary benefits; and  incentives for technological development.

Christopher Lamport, Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry,  Environment and Water Management of Austria, presented on waste  management and the effect of landfill regulations on GHG  mitigation. He highlighted options for reducing the impacts of  waste on the environment and climate, including improved technical  solutions for landfill management and residual waste treatment. He  stressed that these could be considered best practice policies  since all targets promote GHG emissions reductions in several  sectors and promote sustainability.

In the ensuing discussion, participants noted that: there are  fewer examples of best practices for the reduction of non-CO2 GHGs  than for CO2; many parties are in the early stages of developing  policies in this area; criteria related to health, safety and  emissions from energy use in the industrial process need to be  considered; stakeholder involvement is important in developing  policies; and the role of voluntary agreements is controversial.

### INDICATORS USED IN THE ASSESSMENT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES

This  working group met on Wednesday, 12 April. and was chaired by  Francois Moisan (France). Lee Schipper, IEA Senior Scientist, made  a presentation on the motivation, methodologies and applications  of energy indicators research by the IEA. He said energy  indicators are significant for developing a framework for  reporting GHG emissions in the context of the FCCC. He concluded  that the international use of energy indicators is a new concept,  and that some problems remain related to data and a lack of  transparency. He noted anxieties about the costs of the process  and about energy efficiency being confused with energy  intensities.

Yonghun Jung, Vice President of the Institute of Energy Economics  of the Asia Pacific Energy Research Center, presented on energy  efficiency indicators for industry in the Asia Pacific region. He  outlined the results from trend analyses evaluating energy saving  potentials of selected member countries in relation to average use  for the iron, steel and pulp and paper industries. He noted that  the work is limited by incomplete and inconsistent data. He  indicated future work that was required, including the development  of a database, the disaggregation of data, additional analysis of  household and transport sectors, the development of environmental  impact indicators and research on the application of indicators  for CDM projects.

Didier Bosseboeuf, French Agency for the Environment and Energy  Management, made a presentation on monitoring energy efficiency  policies and lessons to be learned from indicators. He discussed  ODYSEE, a monitoring tool for energy efficiency assessment used by  EU member States. He noted the need for transparency and consensus  in the methodology. He stated that, while indicators are not  sufficient to assess the real impact of specific measures, they  can be used to assess the efficiency of a set of measures aimed at  a source of GHGs. He noted that detailed indicators provide a  better link between individual measures and CO2 emissions.

Professor Julia Seixas, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, made a  presentation on a methodological framework to assess policies and  measures, looking at the case of renewables, cogeneration and  energy efficiency in Portugal. She outlined Portugal's ongoing  evaluation of policies and measures, which is being carried out by  sector and by instrument. She stated that it is difficult to learn  from other countries' experiences because each country has its own  specific circumstances. She highlighted the need for greater  comparability and transparency in order to learn from criteria  used by other countries to identify practices most appropriate to  their specific circumstances. She called for a common framework to  report on the assessment of best practices identified by each  country.

In the ensuing discussion, the NETHERLANDS endorsed the need for a  comparable framework and suggested that these form a part of  national communications. He recommended that the conclusions of  this working group note that indicators can play an important role  in achieving compliance with the Protocol, and that the future  adaptation of indicators for national communications should be  considered. The IEA noted differences in the levels of resources  made available by different countries to help fill information  gaps, and stated that the cost of not having the relevant  information could be significant.

The US suggested listing specific data problems and said agreement  had not be reached on these problems. He also said agreement had  not been reached on setting targets. He noted differing views on  the adequacy of inventories.

### METHODOLOGICAL AND INSTITUTIONAL ASPECTS OF BEST PRACTICES

This  working group met on Wednesday, 12 April, and was chaired by John  Lowe (Canada). Tudor Constantinuscu, Energy Charter Secretariat,  highlighted the Protocol on Energy Efficiency and Related  Environmental Aspects (PEEREA). He said this instrument, which has  been ratified by most Annex I countries, promotes cooperation  between OECD countries and countries with economies in transition.  It establishes a review process to analyze energy efficiency  measures in participating countries, focusing on, inter alia,  policy aims, strategies/programmes, energy prices, financing  mechanisms, legislation/regulations and institutions.  Recommendations are provided as a result of the reviews. He  stressed the synergy between the actions under the PEEREA and  obligations under the Kyoto Protocol and called for further  coordination.

Lisbeth Nielson, Danish Energy Agency, presented an outline of the  Danish Green Tax scheme, noting that it involved the levying of  taxes on the energy use of trade, industry and services. She  explained that all additional revenue is recycled, primarily  through lowering non-wage labor costs and subsidizing energy  efficiency investments. An evaluation of the tax showed that it  had a significant environmental effect, modest macro-economic  impact and unexpected distribution consequences, which resulted in  more stress on some sectors and less on others. The package was  adjusted accordingly by providing subsidies for energy saving in  industry, subsidies for cleaner technology and adopting an  agreement scheme for space heating.

Thomas Burki, Switzerland, presented two neutral evaluations to  measure the success of the Swiss Energy Model, a programme that  encourages companies to commit to certain energy efficiency goals.  He said the evaluations focused on the efficiency and functioning  of the model, as well as on its membership, expansion and future  role. The evaluation methods included interviews, analysis of  documents and process attendance. He noted that these evaluations  have been a valuable instrument in helping develop and improve the  model.

Merilee Bonney, Dutch Ministry of Housing, Spatial Planning and  the Environment, gave a presentation on the climate change  policies in the Netherlands. Based on lessons learned, she noted  that increasing analytical transparency and analytical rigor  facilitated the policies and measures process. She added that a  synergy in the mix of instruments would increase the likelihood  that the measure would be accepted and the result achieved. She  elaborated on two cost-calculation methods: the financial cost  method, which looks at costs for end-users; and the national cost  method, which assesses the costs for the entire country. She  stressed the importance of cost effectiveness, but noted that it  was not always the driving force, as other factors were also  significant.

Valery Sediykin, Deputy Director of the Global Climate and Ecology  Institute, Russian Federation, said best practices in terms of  policies and measures could be defined across countries, noting an  example from the EU. He also presented ideas on best practices for  the Kyoto mechanisms, and highlighted aspects of the Russian  Climate Action Plan.

Suzie Baverstock, Director of Global Environmental Issues at BP- Amoco, outlined the process and results of the company's GHG audit  and verification project. Key lessons from the project included:  retrospective estimation of emissions can be problematic, while  recent data is more accurate; rigorous data is needed to build  market confidence for trading between entities and across nations;  and reporting protocols and assurance processes should be  developed as an integral part of emissions trading.

Virginia Sonntag-O'Brien, International Council for Local  Environmental Initiatives, elaborated on the Cities for Climate  Protection (CCP) campaign aimed at building a global movement of  local governments to address the challenge of climate change. She  identified five CCP milestones: emissions inventories and  forecasts, reduction targets, local action plans, implementation,  and monitoring and reporting. The emissions analysis consists of  both corporate analysis and community analysis, focuses on CO2  from fossil fuel combustion and methane from landfills, identifies  big emitters, and forecasts estimates for emissions growth under  business-as-usual scenarios. She suggested that national  governments forge a partnership with local governments and use  them in implementing policies and measures.

The subsequent discussion among participants focused on the  improvement of data quality, transparency of the data production  process, comparability of data and indicators, need for diverse  indicators to apply to diverse contexts, importance of local input  and linkage of national commitments with the local government  initiatives. In summarizing the discussion, Chair Lowe highlighted  issues raised in the presentations and discussions, including the  importance of synergy among policy measures, analytical capacity,  multiple factors as opposed to a cost focus, exchange of  information, and local or regional factors. He also noted  participants' interest in market instruments.

## REPORTS FROM THE CHAIRS OF THE WORKING GROUPS

On Thursday, 13 April, participants met in a plenary session to  hear and discuss reports from the Chairs of the seven working  group sessions held on 11 and 12 April.

### NATIONAL PROGRAMMES

In his report of the working group on  national programmes, Chair Dovland noted convergence among  participants on:the usefulness of the ongoing exchange of information and  sharing of experiences; the need for comprehensive strategies and a mix of policies  and measures; the importance of national circumstances and variability of  design and implementation of policies in different countries; the prevalence of solutions in the energy and energy  efficiency sector; environmental effectiveness, cost efficiency and ancillary  benefits as criteria for good practice; national differences in terms of importance attached to the  criteria; and the importance of stakeholder involvement.

### CROSS CUTTING ISSUES

Chair Gnapelet summarized the discussions of  the working group on cross cutting issues by highlighting that:broad criteria for assessing best practices should be based  on the extent to which they effectively fulfill the objectives of  the FCCC and the Protocol in a cost-effective manner; lack of comparability of policies and measures across  different countries and sectors make it difficult to establish  common criteria or indicators; fiscal policies should aim to remove any market  imperfections, within the context of fulfilling the desired  emissions reductions; and CO2 sequestration should be encouraged.

Next steps identified by participants included defining the  appropriate context in which best practices could be assessed and  encouraging information sharing.

### BEST PRACTICES TO ADDRESS CO2 EMISSIONS FROM ENERGY SUPPLY AND  INDUSTRY

Working group Chair Carrington noted this working  group's discussion on various issues including: the concepts of  best practice, good practice and good fit; cost effectiveness;  stakeholders; specific climate policies; and learning by example.  On energy supply, he highlighted the support for cogeneration,  market reforms and renewables. He referred to the discussion on  the green electricity market, performance standards, and national  and local circumstances. On industry, he noted the discussion on  regional diversity, win-win measures, cost effectiveness, policy  coordination, long-term agreements and voluntary agreements.

### BEST PRACTICES TO ADDRESS CO2 EMISSIONS FROM TRANSPORT, HOUSEHOLDS  AND COMMERCIAL SECTORS

Chair Sadowski noted participants'  comments that national circumstances are a significant factor in  determining best or good practices, indicating that the most  appropriate package of policies or measures will differ between  and within countries. He noted that there had been no agreed view  on what the criteria should be for determining best practices. He  observed that the use of historical data and experience had been  identified by some participants as being valuable in developing  best practices. He said this session had focused primarily on the  transport sector, and suggested that future workshops focus on the  residential and commercial sectors. Further action could include:  the establishment of an ongoing programme for exchange of  experiences and information through workshops or other appropriate  mechanisms; and the elaboration of criteria for identifying or  assessing best practices.

### BEST PRACTICES TO ADDRESS EMISSIONS OF NON CO2 GASES FROM ENERGY,  INDUSTRY, AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND WASTE

Working group Chair  Wenning noted that convergence in the working group had begun to  emerge on:the need for further investments in research and development,  and for information sharing including collating existing data and  identifying gaps and links to the Montreal Protocol; the possible value-added of cooperation across regions and  internationally on chlorinated gases; the possible usefulness of Voluntary Agreements in specific  industrial sectors; the need to take a comprehensive approach so that gains are  not offset by increased energy use; and the importance of public acceptance as a criterion for  policies and measures.

### INDICATORS USED IN THE ASSESSMENT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES

In his  report on the working group session on indicators, Chair Moisan  noted that while indicators could help develop policies and  evaluate progress on whether targets and commitments are being met  they are not a perfect tool to capture every relevant detail, and  that there are other useful tools available. He drew attention to  some  participants' view that disaggregated data may be more  useful than aggregated indicators. Regarding follow-up actions, he  said further work would be useful on methodological approaches,  cooperation involving international organizations, and information  sharing.

### METHODOLOGICAL AND INSTITUTIONAL ASPECTS OF BEST PRACTICES

Chair  Lowe highlighted the importance of synergies among policies,  analytical capacity, multiple factors- including cost  effectiveness and perceptions of fairness-and information  exchange. He noted working group participants' interest in market  instruments. He identified the next step as improving data and  analytical capacity and more fruitful information sharing between  countries.

### PLENARY DISCUSSION

In the ensuing discussion on the working  groups, several participants raised elements they wished to have  the Chair include in his report of the workshop. These included  the need to:encourage awareness creation; adopt a cautious approach in considering the utility of  indicators; consider if subsidies need to correct market imperfections to  promote energy efficiency; address the possibility of good practices being offset by  other practices; adopt a common and coordinated approach; exercise caution in determining market reform as positive for  CO2 reduction; and link activities at different levels of government and the  private sector.

Workshop Chair Dovland concluded by highlighting the suggestion  that the phrase 'best practice' be replaced with the phrase 'good  practice,' and the importance of information sharing.

## PANEL DISCUSSION ON BEST PRACTICES IN POLICIES AND MEASURES

On Thursday, 13 April, participants met in plenary to hear panel  presentations and discuss issues raised at this workshop.  Panelists included representatives from Nigeria, Portugal,  Australia, Poland, Tuvalu, the Netherlands, Japan, Brazil and  France.

### PRESENTATIONS

NIGERIA said policies and measures should consider  national circumstances. He said criteria should be driven by  environmental effectiveness, economic efficiency, political  feasibility, administrative simplicity, incentives for  technological development, and equity. He called for the  minimization of adverse impacts of measures on developing  countries.

PORTUGAL stressed the exchange of information as an avenue to  hasten implementation. Commenting on the lack of transparency and  comparability in the current information sharing process, she  noted the need for a common framework, building on work at the  IEA, OECD and IPCC. She said further technical and sectoral  workshops should be held with support of international agencies.

AUSTRALIA said good practices need to be set within the context of  national circumstances, and that attempting to create a hierarchy  of practices may be unproductive. She stressed the utility of  developing common framework principles, and called for further  sharing of experiences, which could also inform developing  countries.

POLAND suggested that some sectors, including the residential,  agricultural and forestry sectors, required further consideration.  He stated that economies in transition have significant potential  to reduce emissions, but that this requires international support,  particularly in the area of policy-making capacity and public  awareness.

TUVALU noted that referring to something less than best practice  could be considered a euphemism for inaction. He said policies and  measures could be divided into four categories, namely those that  are unacceptable, weak, good or excellent. He said unacceptable  policies included those that rely on the use of nuclear power, and  there should also be concern about proposals to include sinks  within the mechanisms. He said voluntary measures were an example  of a poor measure, as studies suggested that it was often an  ineffective instrument for change. He endorsed the need to ensure  that policies and measures are considered within the context of  additionality and suggested the establishment of a clearinghouse  of information on countries' experiences.

The NETHERLANDS supported reference to good rather than best  practice. He emphasized that this is a 'learning by doing'  experience, and supported periodic meetings of specialists from  both Annex I and non-Annex I countries at the sectoral level. On  next steps, he supported: continuing the exchange of information  on policies and measures; identifying information gaps and ways to  address them; exploring the potential benefits of transnational  cooperation on national policies; and continuing and strengthening  work on indicators and qualitative information to review policies  and measures.

JAPAN supported more active cooperation with developing countries.  He recognized the importance of effective indicators, but noted  some reservations and lock of agreement.

DENMARK supported the need for further development of tools for  assessing and evaluating policies and measures. He called for  consideration of how the development of policies and measures  could be used in coordination with technology transfer and  capacity building in developing countries.

The US said the best policies and measures for reducing GHG  emissions are those tailored to national circumstances. She  preferred reference to best fit rather than best practice. She  cautioned that, although indicators can provide useful insights,  they should not be used exclusively in developing methodologies.  She did not support proposals to develop common indicators, but  endorsed a continuing of information sharing.

BRAZIL highlighted the common but differentiated responsibility of  countries and said that some developing countries were taking  steps to reduce emissions even though they did not have emissions  reduction commitments. He underscored the importance of  considering national circumstances and development priorities,  'learning by doing,' and international cooperation.

FRANCE said sustained good practices in industrial countries could  hasten access to best technologies for developing countries. He  suggested holding workshops involving developing countries and  moving from an analytical to a synthetic approach. He advocated,  inter alia: coordinating training; strengthening the ability of  developing countries to set up projects; collective thinking about  regulatory mechanisms; and adapting regulatory tools to different  contexts.

### DISCUSSION

In the subsequent discussion, UNEP encouraged  developing countries to approach UNEP for help in building  capacity inter alia, to develop policy packages to phase out  harmful subsidies.

An NGO spokesperson suggested that the FCCC Secretariat evaluate  policies and measures based on environmental effects,  transferability and potential for coordination. He suggested  convening sectoral workshops that would enhance transparency and  help operationalize coordination of policies and measures.

GERMANY said indicators should be used as one of several tools to  provide the most accurate possible picture of implemented policies  and measures. He said indicators will increase transparency and  provide up-to-date comparative information.

The US, JAPAN and CANADA cautioned against the use of common  indicators, stressing the influence of national circumstances and  limits to international comparability. AUSTRALIA noted that  national inventories and communications represent a form of  existing common indicators. CANADA called for concrete action and  sharing of experiences of good practices in policies and measures,  rather than theoretical development of indicators, while DENMARK  and the NETHERLANDS noted the usefulness of further developing and  utilizing indicators.

FRANCE emphasized that countries seem to agree on the utility of  using indicators in a national context, but that disagreement  existed on trans-national use of indicators.

ICELAND noted that considerable action to further develop policies  and measures is already taking place nationally and regionally,  and that this issue should not further burden the political  process in the lead-up to COP-6. GEORGIA called for greater  attention to the needs and concerns of developing countries and  economies in transition.

## CLOSING PLENARY

On Thursday afternoon, 13 April, Chair Dovland outlined some of  the issues raised during the workshop. He took note of  participants' comments that this had been a useful meeting and  that work on this issue should continue, with possible future  workshops tailored to specific issues. He observed, however, that  further workshops on policies and measures would not be possible  prior to COP-6. He noted the wide range of views on indicators,  and expressed a personal view that a technical discussion would be  the most beneficial way to approach this issue. He drew attention  to comments on the need to ensure that relevant work is carried  out in preparation for future workshops, and noted the suggestion  that international organizations-such as the IEA and OECD-should  be involved in these activities. He asked participants to reflect  on the information and views presented at this workshop, and hoped  that the positive approach adopted by participants would continue  through the process leading to COP-6. He thanked the Governments  of Denmark and France for co-sponsoring this event and drew the  meeting to a close at 3:35 pm.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR BEFORE COP-6

### CLIMATE POLICY WORKSHOP

FROM KYOTO TO THE HAGUE - EUROPEAN  PERSPECTIVES ON MAKING THE KYOTO PROTOCOL WORK: This workshop will  be held from 18-19 April 2000, in Amsterdam, and is being  organized by the European Forum on Integrated Environmental  Assessment. For more information, contact: Albert Faber, RIVM;  tel:+31-30-274-3683/3728; fax: +31-30-274-4435; e-mail:  albert.faber@rivm.nl; Internet:  http://www.vu.nl/english/o_o/instituten/IVM/research/efiea/announc e.htm

### CONFERENCE ON INNOVATIVE POLICY SOLUTIONS TO GLOBAL CLIMATE  CHANGE

This Conference will be held from 25-26 April 2000, in  Washington, DC, and is being co-hosted by the Pew Center on Global  Climate Change and the Royal Institute of International Affairs.  For more information, contact: Michelle Pilliod; tel: +1-202-544- 7900; fax: +1-202-544-7922; e-mail: pilliodmp@aol.com; Internet:  http://www.pewclimate.org/forms/innov_conf.html

### 11TH GLOBAL WARMING INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE AND EXPO

This  meeting, entitled 'Kyoto Compliance Review - Year 2000  Conference,' will be held from 25-28 April 2000, in Boston. It is  being sponsored by the Global Warming International Programme  Committee and the Global Warming International Center. For more  information, contact: Sinyan Shen; tel: +1-630-910-1551; fax: +1- 630-910-1561; e-mail: syshen@megsinet.net; Internet:  http://globalwarming.net/gw11.html

### SECOND CTI/INDUSTRY SEMINAR FOR EASTERN EUROPE ON CLIMATE FRIENDLY  TECHNOLOGY AND THE INTERNATIONAL ENERGY AGENCY FINANCE FORUM

This  seminar will be held from 11-12 May 2000, in Warsaw, Poland, in  cooperation with the Baltic Chain Initiative and the Polish  Ministry of the Environment.  For more information, contact:  Michael Rucker; tel: +33-1-4057-6522; fax: +33-1-4057-6759; e- mail: rucker@iea.org ; Internet:  http://www.climatetech.net/conferences/warsaw/

### MILLENIUM INTERNATIONAL MEDIA CONFERENCE ON THE ENVIRONMENT

This  conference will be held from 5-9 June 2000, in Suva, Fiji in  conjunction with the 12th Asia Pacific and 3rd Commonwealth  Congress of Environmental Journalists. It is organized by Asia  Pacific Forum of Environmental Journalists, the Commonwealth  Environmental Journalists Association and Pina Pacific Forum on  Environmental Journalists. For more information, contact: Nina  Ratulele; tel: +679-303-623; fax: +679-303-943; e-mail:  pina@is.com.fj.

### 12TH SESSION OF THE FCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES

SB-12 will be held  from 12-16 June 2000, in Bonn. It will be preceded by one week of  informal meetings, including workshops. For more information,  contact: the FCCC Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815-1000; fax: +49- 228-815-1999; e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.de; Internet:  http://www.unfccc.de/sessions/sessions.html

### INTERNATIONAL ENERGY WORKSHOP

This workshop will be held from 20- 22 June 2000, in Stanford, California, USA. For more information,  contact: International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis;  tel: +43-2236-8070; fax: +43-2236-71313; e-mail: info@iiasa.ac.at;  Internet: http://www.iiasa.ac.at/Research/ECS/june99/fc2000.html

### WORKSHOP ON RENEWABLE ENERGY FOR THE DEVELOPING WORLD

This  workshop will be held from 26-30 June 2000, in Carbondale,  Colorado, USA, and is being organized by Solar Energy  International. For more information, contact Solar Energy  International; tel:+1-970-963-8855; fax: +1-970-963-8866; e-mail:  sei@solarenergy.org; Internet:  http://www.solarenergy.org/solarck.html

### WORLD RENEWABLE ENERGY CONGRESS VI

This event, entitled  'Renewable Energy 2000,' will be held from 1-7 July 2000, in  Brighton, Sussex, UK. It is organized by the World Renewable  Energy Network. The event features presentations on renewable  energy technologies from industry experts around the world. For  more information, contact: A Sayigh; tel: +44-1189-611365; fax:  +44-1189-611364; e-mail: asayigh@netcomuk.co.uk

### FIFTH INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON GREENHOUSE GAS CONTROL  TECHNOLOGIES

This conference will be held from 12-16 August 2000,  in Cairns, Australia. For more information, contact: Colin  Paulson; tel: +61-2-9490-8790; fax: +61-2-9490-8819/8909; e-mail:  cpaulson@det.csiro.au; Internet:  http://www.ieagreen.org.uk/ghgt5.htm

### 13TH SESSION OF THE FCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES

SB-13 will be held  from 11-15 September 2000. It will be preceded by one week of  informal meetings, including workshops. For more information,  contact the FCCC Secretariat.

### SIXTH CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE FCCC

COP-6 will be held  from 13-24 November 2000, in The Hague, the Netherlands. For more  information, contact the FCCC Secretariat.