---
title: "SUMMARY OF THE SIXTH CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE: 13-25 NOVEMBER 2000"
id: enb12163e
url: http://www.iisd.ca/vol12/enb12163e
date: 2000-11-25
abstract: "The Sixth Conference of the Parties (COP-6) to the United Nations  Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the resumed  thirteenth sessions of the UNFCCC's subsidiary bodies were held in  The Hague, the Netherlands, from 13-25 November 2000. Over 7,000  participants from 182 governments, 323 intergovernmental and non- governmental organizations, and 443 media outlets were in  attendance. The meeting aimed to set the operational details for  commitments on reducing emissions of greenhouse gases under the  1997 Kyoto Protocol, and to reach agreement on actions to  strengthen implementation of the UNFCCC itself. In attempting to  achieve these goals, the meeting was intended to bring to a close  more than two years of preparations and negotiations set out in  the UNFCCC's 1998 Buenos Aires Plan of Action."
---

During the first week, delegates met in informal contact groups  and other negotiating groups mandated by the UNFCCC subsidiary  bodies. These meetings aimed to reduce differences on text for  decisions on a range of issues related to the Protocol and the  UNFCCC, including: the transfer of technology and capacity  building to assist developing countries and countries with  economies in transition; the adverse effects of climate change and  the impact of implementation of response measures; best practices  in domestic policies and measures to address greenhouse gas  emissions; the mechanisms outlined under the Protocol; a  compliance system for the Protocol; and issues relating to the  land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) sector.

The resumed thirteenth sessions of the subsidiary bodies, which  had begun in Lyon in September and reconvened from 13-18 November  in The Hague, concluded their work by adopting a number of draft  conclusions containing text for decisions by COP-6. However, much  of the text transmitted by the subsidiary bodies to the COP lacked  complete agreement by delegates and differences on many crucial  issues remained.

During the second week, COP-6 President Jan Pronk (the  Netherlands) attempted to facilitate progress on the many disputed  political and technical issues by convening high-level informal  Plenary sessions to address the key political issues, which he  grouped into four 'clusters' or 'boxes,' as follows: (a) capacity  building, technology transfer, adverse effects and guidance to the  Global Environment Facility (GEF); (b) mechanisms; (c) LULUCF;  and, (d) compliance, policies and measures, and accounting,  reporting and review under Articles 5 (methodological issues), 7  (communication of information) and 8 (review of information).  Ministers and other senior negotiators convened in four groups to  negotiate on these clusters in an attempt to reach consensus.  However, by Thursday, 23 November, negotiations appeared stalled,  and President Pronk distributed a Note containing his proposals on  key issues in an attempt to force a breakthrough that would lead  to consensus. Ministerial negotiations took place throughout  Friday and into Saturday. However, after almost 36 hours of  intense talks on the President's proposals,  negotiators did not  achieve a breakthrough, with supplementarity, compliance and  LULUCF proving to be particular sticking points. On Saturday  afternoon, 25 November, President Pronk convened a final high- level informal Plenary in which he announced that delegates had  failed to reach agreement. Delegates agreed to suspend COP-6, and  expressed a willingness to resume their work in 2001.

# A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE UNFCCC AND THE KYOTO PROTOCOL - THE ROAD TO  COP-6

Climate change is considered one of the most serious threats to  the sustainability of the world's environment, human health and  well-being, and the global economy. Mainstream scientists agree  that the Earth's climate is being affected by the build-up of  greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide, caused by human  activities. Despite some lingering uncertainties, a majority of  scientists believe that precautionary and prompt action is  necessary.

The international response to climate change took shape with the  development of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate  Change (UNFCCC). Adopted in 1992, the UNFCCC sets out a framework  for action aimed at stabilizing atmospheric concentrations of  greenhouse gases at a level that would prevent anthropogenic  (human-induced) actions from leading to 'dangerous interference'  with the climate system. The UNFCCC entered into force on 21 March  1994, 90 days after the receipt of the 50th ratification. To date,  it has received 185 instruments of ratification, acceptance,  approval or accession from States. Since it entered into force,  six meetings of the Conference of the Parties (COP) have taken  place, as well as numerous workshops and meetings of the UNFCCC's  subsidiary bodies - the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI)  and the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice  (SBSTA).

### THE KYOTO PROTOCOL

The Ad Hoc Group on the Berlin Mandate,  established by  COP-1, met between 1995 and 1997 to reach  agreement on a further step in efforts to combat climate change.  Following intense negotiations, delegates to COP-3, which was held  in Kyoto, Japan in December 1997, agreed to a Protocol to the  UNFCCC that commits developed countries and countries making the  transition to a market economy to achieve quantified targets for  decreasing their emissions of greenhouse gases. These countries,  known under the UNFCCC as Annex I Parties, committed themselves to  reducing their overall emissions of six greenhouse gases by at  least 5% below 1990 levels over the period between 2008 and 2012,  with differentiated targets for most of these countries. The  Protocol also provides the basis for three mechanisms to assist  Annex I Parties in meeting their national targets cost-effectively  - an emissions trading system, joint implementation (JI) of  emissions-reduction projects between Annex I Parties, and a Clean  Development Mechanism (CDM) to encourage joint projects between  Annex I and non-Annex I Parties.

While delegates in Kyoto agreed to these emissions reductions  targets and methods, it was left for subsequent meetings to decide  on most of the rules and operational details that will determine  how these cuts are achieved and how countries' efforts are  measured and assessed. Although many countries have signed the  Protocol, the majority is waiting until these operational details  are negotiated before deciding whether or not to ratify. To enter  into force, the Protocol must be ratified by 55 Parties to the  UNFCCC, including Annex I Parties representing at least 55% of the  total carbon dioxide emissions for 1990. To date, only 30 Parties  have ratified the Protocol.

### THE BUENOS AIRES PLAN OF ACTION

The Fourth Conference of the  Parties (COP-4) met in Buenos Aires, Argentina, in November 1998,  to set out a work schedule for reaching agreement on the  operational details of the Protocol and for strengthening  implementation of the UNFCCC itself. This work schedule was  outlined in a document called the Buenos Aires Plan of Action. The  critical deadline under the Plan of Action was COP-6, where  Parties were to attempt to reach agreement on a package of issues.  Critical Protocol-related issues needing resolution included rules  relating to the mechanisms, a regime for monitoring Parties'  compliance with their commitments, and accounting methods for  national emissions and emissions reductions. Rules on crediting  countries for removing carbon from the atmosphere through planting  trees, and possibly other measures, were also to be addressed.  Issues under the UNFCCC requiring resolution included questions of  capacity building, the transfer and development of technology, and  assistance to those developing countries that are especially  vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change or to actions  taken by industrialized countries to combat climate change.

### PREPARATIONS FOR COP-6

COP-6 was preceded by numerous formal and  informal meetings and consultations held during 1999 and 2000. The  UNFCCC subsidiary bodies held their tenth sessions in Bonn,  Germany, from 31 May - 11 June 1999, and began the formal process  of fulfilling the Buenos Aires Plan of Action. This work was  continued at COP-5 and at the eleventh sessions of the subsidiary  bodies, held in Bonn from 25 October - 5 November 1999. During the  first few months of 2000, several UNFCCC technical workshops on  key issues under the Plan of Action were held to assist the  process leading to COP-6.

### SB-12

Work resumed at a formal level with the twelfth sessions of  the UNFCCC subsidiary bodies (SB-12), held from 12-16 June 2000,  in Bonn, and preceded by one week of informal meetings. At this  meeting, participants developed negotiating text on critical  issues such as the mechanisms and compliance.

### SB-13 PART I

Informal consultations and workshops were held  during July and August 2000, followed by the first part of the  thirteenth sessions of the subsidiary bodies (SB-13), held from  11-15 September 2000 in Lyon, France, and again preceded by a week  of informal meetings. During the informal meetings and the first  part of SB-13, delegates discussed text for decisions covering a  range of technical and political issues, with the aim of preparing  text for a comprehensive agreement at COP-6.

Many delegates and observers at SB-13 Part I expressed concern at  the slow progress and significant amount of work that remained for  delegates at The Hague. Political positions on the key issues  remained entrenched, with little indication of willingness to  compromise or move forward. While negotiating text emerged on the  key elements of the Plan of Action, significant disagreements  remained.

### INTERSESSIONAL CONSULTATIONS AFTER SB-13 PART I

Several informal  meetings and consultations were held following SB-13. These  included consultations on Articles 5, 7 and 8, LULUCF, compliance,  mechanisms, adverse effects, and LDCs, as well as informal high- level consultations held in early October and chaired by Jan  Pronk, the Dutch Environment Minister and President-designate of  COP-6. These meetings resulted in some further progress. However,  with such a complex array of political and technical issues on the  table, and an emphasis on achieving agreement on the entire   'package' of issues under negotiation, many observers prior to  COP-6 suggested that accommodating all countries' interests and  aims could prove difficult.

# COP-6 REPORT

The Sixth Conference of the Parties (COP-6) to the UNFCCC  officially opened on Monday morning, 13 November 2000. It was  preceded by a Welcoming Ceremony attended by Her Majesty Queen  Beatrix of the Netherlands. COP-6 President-designate Jan Pronk  welcomed participants and said they faced the great challenge of  agreeing on the instruments and details to achieve the targets  agreed in Kyoto. While acknowledging the significant differences  between countries' positions on key issues, he said reasonable  compromises were possible on all issues.

Wim Deetman, Mayor of The Hague, expressed hope that this would  become the city where history would be made in the development of  climate change management. Delegates then listened to readings by  Dutch actor Aus Greidanus of short quatrains on climate change  written by Dutch national poet Gerrit Komrij.

In a pre-recorded video message to delegates, UN Secretary-General  Kofi Annan stated that the task of reducing greenhouse gas  emissions was enormous, and would require 'radical change.' He  drew attention to support at the recent United Nations Millennium  Summit for every effort to be made to bring the Kyoto Protocol  into force by 2002.

Robert Watson, Chair of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate  Change (IPCC), described the current state of scientific  understanding of the Earth's climate system, highlighted the  vulnerability of ecological systems, and underlined the need for  effective policy and technological responses. He noted a projected  increase in global mean surface temperatures of about 1.5oC - 6oC  by 2100 (almost double the 1995 IPCC predictions) and a rise in  sea levels, and outlined the negative implications of these  increases for water resources, agriculture, natural ecosystems and  human health. He urged governments to undertake significant  technological and policy responses, and, in particular, to promote  increased public and private sector research and development.

Following these speeches, COP-5 President Jan Szyszko (Poland)  formally opened COP-6, stating that it was possible to reach  agreement and ensure the Protocol entered into force in 2002, but  many difficult issues still had to be resolved. Jan Pronk,  Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and Environment of the  Netherlands, was elected President of COP-6. He reaffirmed his  commitment to ensuring that the interests of all delegations will  be served by the UNFCCC.

UNFCCC Executive Secretary Michael Zammit Cutajar said action to  deal with climate change cannot be delayed. He said developing  countries should feel supported in their efforts to address  climate change and its impacts, and all Parties should consider  the Protocol to be ratifiable.

Delegates then heard general statements from a number of Parties.  Nigeria, on behalf of the Group of 77 and China (G-77/China),  rejected the proposal by a 'key Annex I country' tying the  provision of financial assistance to some form of new emissions  reduction commitment by developing countries. He urged provision  of funding through a mechanism other than the GEF. France, on  behalf of the European Union (EU), stressed that domestic actions  should be the main means for fulfilling developed country  commitments. Switzerland, on behalf of the Environmental Integrity  Group (a coalition of countries including Switzerland, Mexico and  the Republic of Korea), said the CDM should be based on an  incremental approach, JI should follow a two-track approach, and  liability under emissions trading should be linked to the nature  and scope of the enforcement branch of the compliance regime.  Vanuatu, on behalf of the Least Developed Countries (LDCs) group,  called for assistance in implementing the UNFCCC and Protocol.

This report outlines the meeting according to the COP agenda  items, as listed in document FCCC/CP/2000/1.

## ORGANIZATIONAL MATTERS

### STATUS OF RATIFICATION

On Monday, 13 November, the COP-6 Plenary  received a report from the Secretariat on the status of  ratification of the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol, and noted  that the UNFCCC now had 183 Parties, and would have 185 Parties as  of 6 December 2000. On Friday, 24 November, the COP also invited  the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to participate in its work as  an Observer, pending receipt of a communications on the outcome of  ongoing discussions held between the UN Office of Legal Affairs,  interested Parties and UN bodies.

### ADOPTION OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

On 13 November, COP-6  considered the rules of procedure. President Pronk noted that  there was still no consensus on draft rule 42 (voting), and  delegates decided to apply the draft rules with the exception of  this provision. He added that consultations would be held on this  issue. On Saturday, 25 November, President Pronk reported back to  delegates that consultations had not been possible, given the  heavy workload, and that the matter would be placed on the  provisional agenda for COP-7 (FCCC/CP/2000/L.1/Add.1).

### ADOPTION OF AGENDA

On 13 November, COP-6 adopted its agenda, with  the exception of item 5 on 'Second review of adequacy of Article  4.2(a) and (b) of the Convention,' which the G-77/China had  proposed to amend to 'review of the adequacy of implementation of  Article 4, paragraph 2(a) and (b) of the Convention'  (FCCC/CP/2000/L.1/Add.1). On 25 November, President Pronk reported  that there was still no consensus. He suggested including item 5  as formulated in the agenda, including the accompanying amendment  by the G-77/China, on the COP-7 agenda. He said the matter would  receive further consideration and he would report back to COP-7.  The G-77/China said this was a sensitive matter and expressed the  Group's reservations about further discussions.

### ELECTION OF OFFICERS OTHER THAN PRESIDENT

In a COP-6 Plenary  session held on Monday, 20 November, President Pronk reported that  some regional groups had requested more time to finalize their  bureau nominations. It was agreed that the COP-5 Bureau would  continue in office until this matter was resolved. The issue was  taken up again on Friday, 24 November, when COP-6 elected its  Bureau members. The Vice Presidents elected were: Philip Gwage  (Uganda), Mohammed Barkindo (Nigeria), Vyatcheslav Lipinsky  (Ukraine), Andrej Kranjc (Slovenia), Raul Estrada-Oyuela  (Argentina), and Tuiloma Neroni Slade (Samoa). Gao Feng (China)  was elected Rapporteur. Harald Dovland (Norway) and John Ashe  (Antigua and Barbuda) were re-appointed as Chairs of SBSTA and  SBI, respectively, after a waiver of a procedural rule to permit  them to be appointed to the Bureau for a third consecutive year.  On Saturday, 25 November, President Pronk noted that the Asian  group had yet to nominate a second candidate and urged it to do so  as soon as possible.

### ADMISSION OF OBSERVERS

On Monday, 13 November, COP-6 admitted as  observers five intergovernmental organizations and 85 non- governmental organizations (FCCC/CP/2000/2). On Friday, 24  November, Parties also agreed to admit the Association of South- East Asian Nations (ASEAN) as an observer organization, in  response to a request by Malaysia (FCCC/CP/2000/2/Add.1).

### DATE AND VENUE OF COP-7

On 25 November, COP-6 adopted a decision  accepting with gratitude Morocco's offer to host COP-7 and  deciding that COP-7 will be held in Marrakech from 29 October - 9  November 2001 (FCCC/CP/2000/1/Add.1).

### CALENDAR OF MEETINGS OF CONVENTION BODIES

On 25 November, COP-6  addressed the issue of the calendar of meetings of the Convention  bodies, and agreed to add the sessional periods for 2004. The  first sessional period was set for 14-25 June 2004; the second,  for 29 November - 10 December (FCCC/CP/2000/1).

### ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON CREDENTIALS

COP-6 adopted the report on  credentials (FCCC/CP/2000/4) on 25 November.

## REPORTS OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES

The subsidiary bodies to the UNFCCC met from 13-18 November,  resuming their thirteenth sessions, which began in September in  Lyon, France (SB-13 Part I). At their first joint meeting in The  Hague on Monday, 13 November, SBSTA Chair Harald Dovland (Norway),  said the contact groups and Joint Working Group on Compliance  (JWG) held at SB-13 Part I would resume their tasks. These groups  - which related to key issues including adverse effects,  mechanisms, compliance, capacity building, LULUCF, policies and  measures, Articles 5, 7 and 8, and the financial mechanism - met  on numerous occasions from 13-18 November.

On Saturday, 18 November, SBI and SBSTA met both jointly and  separately to conclude the work for their thirteenth sessions and  to adopt their reports of the sessions. During SB-13 Part II, the  subsidiary bodies jointly addressed and forwarded draft  conclusions for consideration by COP-6 on a number of issues,  including adverse effects, compliance, the mechanisms, activities  implemented jointly under the pilot phase, and capacity building  (FCCC/SBI/2000/CRP.11 and FCCC/SBSTA/2000/CRP.10). SBI separately  took up: organizational matters, Annex I communications -  greenhouse gas inventory data from 1990-98; non-Annex I  communications; financial mechanism; and administrative and  financial matters (FCCC/SBI/2000/CRP.11). SBSTA separately  addressed: organizational matters; methodological issues,  including LULUCF, Articles 5, 7 and 8, and impact of single  projects on emissions in the commitment period; technology  development and transfer; policies and measures; and cooperation  with relevant organizations (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/CRP.10).

On Monday, 20 November, SBI Chair John Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda)  and SBSTA Chair Dovland reported to COP-6 on the work of the  subsidiary bodies at their twelfth sessions, held in June 2000,  and at Part I of their thirteenth sessions, held in September  2000. They also provided oral reports on progress made during Part  II of their thirteenth sessions. COP-6 took note of these reports  (SBI-12 - FCCC/SBI/2000/5; SBI-13 Part I - FCCC/SBI/2000/10;  SBSTA-12 - FCCC/SBSTA/2000/5; SBSTA-13 Part I -  FCCC/SBSTA/2000/10).

## REVIEW OF IMPLEMENTATION OF COMMITMENTS AND OTHER PROVISIONS OF  THE UNFCCC

### ANNEX I COMMUNICATIONS

On Monday, 13 November, SBI Chair Ashe  introduced documents containing greenhouse gas inventory data from  Annex I Parties for 1990-98, and on the progress of the in-depth  reviews of Annex I Parties' second national communications  (FCCC/SBI/2000/INF.14, FCCC/SBI/2000/14, FCCC/SBI/2000/11, and  FCCC/SBI/2000/INF.13). In its closing session on Saturday, 18  November, the SBI adopted draft conclusions on this issue, noting  difficulties in comparing trends in emissions as a result of  incomplete and inconsistent reporting by some Annex I Parties. The  SBI also expressed concern over the increase in emissions of many  Annex I Parties and reaffirmed the need for further action to  reverse the trend. On Saturday, 25 November, the COP took note of  these conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2000/CRP.14).

### NON-ANNEX I COMMUNICATIONS

On 13 November, delegates addressed  the provision of financial and technical support to non-Annex I  Parties and considered a document on the financial support  provided by the GEF for the preparation of national communications  (FCCC/SBI/2000/INF.8) and the report of the second meeting of the  Consultative Group of Experts (FCCC/SBI/2000/16). Mauritania, on  behalf of the G-77/China, stressed that lack of funding and  support for inventory compilation and national communications  significantly influenced accuracy of the data and the rate at  which progress was being made. The Secretariat also introduced its  second compilation and synthesis of non-Annex I Parties' initial  national communications.

On Saturday, 18 November, delegates considered and adopted the SBI  draft conclusions to be forwarded to COP-6 on the provision of  financial and technical support (FCCC/SBI/ 2000/CRP.12), and on  the report of the second meeting of the Consultative Group of  Experts (FCCC/SBI/2000/CRP.13). They also considered and agreed to  transmit a recommendation by the SBI to the COP, which included a  draft decision on the second compilation and synthesis of initial  national communications of non-Annex I Parties.

On Saturday, 25 November, the COP adopted the decision  (FCCC/SBI/2000/L.5) on the second compilation and synthesis of  initial national communications of non-Annex I Parties, which  requests non-Annex I Parties that have not made their initial  communications within three years of entry into force of the  Convention for those Parties, to do so as soon as possible. It  also requests the Secretariat to prepare the third compilation and  synthesis of initial national communications by COP-7, and report  on issues, constraints and problems encountered in using the  UNFCCC guidelines for preparation of non-Annex I communications,  as well as any other issues raised by Parties.

### REPORT OF THE GEF AS THE FINANCIAL MECHANISM

During the first  week of negotiations, delegates met several times in contact group  meetings and 'informal informal' consultations co-chaired by SBI  Chair John Ashe and Kerry Groves (Australia) to consider draft  text on additional guidance to the GEF. Discussions cleared some  bracketed text, however disagreements remained on several  paragraphs, including sources of information on which to base  funding for Stage II adaptation activities. Draft conclusions were  forwarded by the SBI to the COP-6 on Monday, 20 November. Also  during the first week, a group on financial issues - mandated by  President Pronk - met on 17 and 18 November to begin discussions  on cross-cutting financial and funding issues being considered in  parallel negotiations on capacity building, technology transfer  and adverse effects. Due to process-related objections raised by  the G-77/China, the financial issues group failed to make  substantive progress. During the second week of negotiations, the  financial mechanism and broader issues related to funding were  addressed in high-level informal discussions as part of President  Pronk's 'Box A' cluster of 'crunch' issues. Since there was no  final agreement in these negotiations, the discussions and draft  conclusions were referred to the resumed session of COP-6 for  further consideration.

### SB-13 Part II:

In the SBI meeting on Monday, 13 November, Chair  Ashe introduced documents containing a report of the GEF to COP-6  on its activities under the financial mechanism (FCCC/CP/2000/3),  and a review by the GEF of its climate change enabling activities  (FCCC/CP/2000/3/Add.1). On 15 and 16 November, SBI Chair Ashe,  with contact group Co-Chair Groves, convened closed 'informal  informal' consultations to consider a revised Co-Chairs' text on  additional guidance to the operating entity of the financial  mechanism. Discussions focused on text relating to the provision  of GEF resources for country-driven Stage II adaptation  activities. Parties could not agree whether these adaptation  activities should be in the context of/build upon national  communications [and] [or] national studies. The text remained in  brackets, as did text on demonstration projects. Delegates also  discussed and failed to agree on text requesting the GEF to  continue to provide financing, where appropriate, and consistent  with both the guidance of the COP and the GEF's mandate, to  support the implementation of the capacity building framework, and  to further support, enhance and implement the GEF's capacity- building activities in accordance with the framework.

In the SBI meeting on Saturday, 18 November, Chair Ashe introduced  the draft conclusions on the report of the GEF  (FCCC/SBI/2000/CRP.15). He then introduced the draft conclusions  on additional guidance to the operating entity of the financial  mechanism (FCCC/SBI/2000/CRP.16/Rev.1). Co-Chair Groves reported  on the outcome of the financial mechanisms contact group  discussions. On the issue of funding for Stage II adaptation  activities, he said the G-77/China wanted to have the COP-4  decision (2/CP.4) refined so that Stage II adaptation activities  could be based on national communications or in-depth studies on  vulnerability. He said Annex II Parties preferred to retain the  thrust of the COP-4 decision with flexibility, allowing small  island developing States (SIDS) and LDCs to receive funding based  solely on their vulnerability.

The US and EU opposed a proposal by Argentina to remove brackets  from text on national communications, which would have permitted  funding for Stage II adaptation activities to be based either on  national communications or other national studies. The G-77/China,  supported by Argentina, the Alliance of Small Island States  (AOSIS), Saudi Arabia and other developing countries, expressed  disappointment at the lack of agreement on the financial  mechanism. The SBI agreed to transmit this text with the brackets  to the COP for its consideration.

### Cross-cutting Financial Issues:

Cross-cutting financial issues  relating to capacity building, technology transfer, adverse  effects and guidance to the GEF were addressed by a group on  financial issues, which was convened on 17 and 18 November. Co- Chair Kerry Groves (Australia) said the financial issues group was  mandated by President Pronk to examine funding proposals discussed  in the contact groups on capacity building, technology transfer  and adverse effects. He said the group would provide input that  would assist President Pronk in preparing elements of a framework  to integrate the various proposals that could help focus high- level deliberations among ministers and heads of delegation.

He invited Parties to examine the paper prepared by the  Secretariat, which lists the proposals, in order to identify what  funding activities participants thought might be undertaken by the  GEF and by alternative funding sources/mechanisms. Argentina, the  G-77/China and others expressed concern that this group was not  established using the usual process. The G-77/China said it was  not able to participate in the discussion, noting the absence of  its issue coordinators and the need for sufficient time to  consider the whole issue in context. The meeting closed without  having undertaken a substantive discussion or examination of these  issues, which were left to be taken up in high-level consultations  the following week..

### COP-6 High-level Informal Discussions:

On Monday, 20 November,  President Pronk outlined the 'crunch' issues on which agreement  had not been reached. The financing issue was considered in 'Box  A' along with adverse effects, technology transfer and capacity  building. President Pronk noted disagreement on: the types of  adaptation activities the GEF should fund, and modalities for such  funding; whether the GEF should fund capacity-building for  disaster preparedness and disaster management, and for the  establishment or strengthening of early warning systems for  extreme weather events, issues he said were closely linked to  negotiations on adverse effects of climate change; and whether the  GEF should be the only channel for funding in certain areas,  including technology transfer.

On Tuesday, 21 November, an informal group was convened and  facilitated by Minister Sven Auken (Denmark) and Minister Rejoice  Mabudhafasi (South Africa) and assisted by SBI Chair John Ashe, to  address this issue together with the other 'Box A' issues.

On Wednesday, 22 November, in the informal high-level Plenary,  Minister Auken reported that resolution of the funding issue would  enable progress on many of the outstanding issues, and noted the  apparent flexibility in the views on the GEF, indicating that  other possibilities for new and additional funding were being  explored by Parties. Japan, supported by Canada, noted the tabling  of a draft proposal by the Umbrella Group (a loose alliance of  Annex I Parties that includes the US, Canada, Australia, Japan,  Norway, the Russian Federation, Ukraine, and New Zealand) on the  creation of a new 'window' in the GEF to channel funding for the  issues discussed in 'Box A', the streamlining of the GEF; and  special consideration for LDCs and SIDS.  Minister Auken said a  separate EU proposal on financial issues had also been presented  and that, based also on the proposal submitted by the Umbrella  Group, there was substantial material on which to negotiate.

In the informal high-level Plenary on Thursday, 23 November,  Ministers Mabudhafasi and Auken reported that despite the  consultations, the financing issue remained unresolved.

### President's Note:

In an attempt to progress the negotiations on  this issue, on Thursday evening, 23 November, President Pronk  distributed a Note, which proposed creating an Adaptation Fund, a  Convention Fund, and a Climate Resources Committee, as well as  increasing resources for climate change funding.

The Adaptation Fund would be a new fund under the GEF, created as  a trust fund, with special consideration given to the needs of the  LDCs and SIDS. This fund would finance concrete adaptation  projects in non-Annex I Parties (Stage III activities) with  finances generated by the share of proceeds on the CDM (2% of the  Certified Emissions Reductions (CERs) generated by a project) and  implemented by the UN implementing agencies.  Activities would  include: avoidance of deforestation, combating land degradation,  and desertification.

The proposed Convention Fund would be a window under the GEF, with  separate guidance and special consideration given to the needs of  the LDCs and SIDS. Under this window, Annex II Parties would  provide new and additional funds for activities in developing  countries. It would also provide support for capacity building in  countries with economies in transition. The funding would come  from a third replenishment of the GEF, voluntary contributions by  Annex II Parties, and transferral of a certain percentage of Annex  II Parties' initial assigned amount to the registry of the fund.  Annex I Parties would be able to acquire these units, on the basis  of Protocol Article 17, for the purpose of meeting commitments of  Protocol Article 3.1.

The Note also proposed increasing resources through other  channels, with the aim of reaching an annual level of US$1 billion  by 2005. If this level was not reached, a levy would be applied on  JI and/or emissions trading. It further proposed the establishment  of a Climate Resources Committee at COP-7 to give advice to  existing financial channels and institutions, such as the GEF and  regional development banks, focusing on: how to increase climate  funding, mainstreaming, and monitoring and assessment.

### Conclusion of COP-6 Part I:

Ministerial negotiations on President  Pronk's Note took place throughout Friday and into Saturday.  However, after almost 36 hours of intense talks, negotiators did  not achieve a breakthrough, and on Saturday afternoon, 25  November, President Pronk convened a final high-level informal  Plenary in which he announced that delegates had failed to reach  agreement.

On 25 November, the reports and draft decision were addressed in  the closing Plenary. The COP took note of the Report of the Global  Environment Facility to the COP (FCCC/SBI/2000/CRP.15), including  the report on the review of the implementation of commitments and  of other provisions of the UNFCCC (FCCC/CP/2000/3) and the report  on the review of the GEF's climate change enabling activities  (FCCC/CP/2000/3/Add.1), as well as the draft decision on  Additional guidance to an operating entity of the financial  mechanism (FCCC/CP/2000/CRP.8). Since no agreement was reached on  the draft conclusion, draft decision, reports, or 'crunch issues'  outlined by President Pronk, the Plenary deferred decision to the  resumed session of COP-6.

### CAPACITY BUILDING

During the first week of negotiations,  delegates discussed issues related to capacity building in a  contact group that divided into two sub-groups: one on countries  with economies in transition (EITs) and one on developing  countries. A number of closed 'informal informals' were also  convened. Discussions in both groups focused on draft COP  decisions and frameworks for capacity building in EITs and  developing countries. Following the first week's negotiations,  draft conclusions, with the bracketed frameworks annexed, were  presented by SBSTA-13 to the COP on Monday, 20 November. During  the second week of negotiations, the issue of capacity building  was addressed in high-level informal discussions as part of  President Pronk's first cluster of 'crunch issues' - 'Box A.'

### SB-13 Part II:

During the opening SBI/SBSTA meeting on Monday, 13  November, SBSTA Chair Dovland recalled that the subsidiary bodies  had agreed at a previous session to continue considering capacity  building on the basis of two draft decisions, one for countries  with economies in transition and one for developing countries.  This issue was then considered in a contact group, co-chaired by  SBI Chair Ashe and Jukka Uosukainen (Finland), and in 'informal  informal' consultations.

### Capacity Building in Countries with Economies in Transition:

On  Tuesday, 14 November, this contact group took up the draft  decision and annexed draft framework on capacity building in EITs.  Delegates cleared all of the legal and most of the substantive  issues contained in the draft decision as well as the framework  for capacity building. During this meeting, the US and EU  requested that text on the provision of financial and technical  support for the implementation of the framework through the 'GEF  within its mandate' be bracketed pending the outcome of the  contact group on the financial mechanism. On Thursday, 16  November, the group revisited the remaining bracketed paragraphs  and agreed to remove brackets around reference to Protocol Article  10 (existing commitments) in the preamble. However, the group  failed to remove brackets around the paragraphs on financial  issues and the role of the GEF, and agreed to forward the text as  it stood to the subsidiary bodies.

During the closing session of the subsidiary bodies on Saturday,  18 November, Co-Chair Uosukainen reported that the contact group  had agreed on a framework that sets out the scope and basis for  action in EITs, identifies EIT priorities, and outlines  responsibilities of EITs in implementing the framework and those  of Annex II Parties - industrialized Parties having financial and  technology transfer commitments under the UNFCCC - in assisting  EITs.

In this draft decision (FCCC/CP/2000/CRP.12), the subsidiary  bodies recommend that the COP, inter alia, adopt the framework for  capacity building in EITs, decide to review the effectiveness of  the framework at regular intervals, and urge multilateral and  bilateral agencies to coordinate in support of the implementation  of the annexed framework. It also recommends that the first  Meeting of the Parties to the Protocol (COP/MOP-1) adopt a  decision endorsing a framework for capacity building under the  UNFCCC, that parallels the annexed framework, with additional  reference to areas for capacity building relating to the  implementation of the Protocol. The subsidiary bodies agreed to  forward the draft decision and annexed framework to the COP for  consideration.

### Capacity Building in Developing Countries:

Delegates began  considering the Co-Chairs' paper containing a proposal for a draft  decision and an annex outlining a capacity-building framework in  developing countries in 'informal informal' meetings on 15 and 16  November. On 16 November, they agreed to defer the paragraphs on  financing and the role of the GEF to the contact group addressing  the financial mechanism. They could not agree on who would monitor  and review progress of implementation of the decision, and at what  intervals.

The contact group held its final meeting on 17 November. Delegates  considered all the outstanding bracketed paragraphs in the draft  decision and the draft framework. On the operational paragraph  containing the purpose of the framework, delegates agreed that the  framework 'should' guide capacity-building activities related to  the implementation of the UNFCCC. They agreed to recommend  COP/MOP-1 to adopt a decision containing a framework for capacity  building that reaffirms this framework with additional reference  to priority areas for capacity building relating to the  implementation of the Protocol.

In the scope for capacity building outlined in the annexed  framework, delegates debated and failed to remove brackets from  language relating to adaptation response measures. They also  disagreed on the need for national adaptation programmes of  action, with the US stating that this was being considered by the  contact group on adverse effects.

In his report to the joint subsidiary bodies meeting on 18  November, Co-Chair Uosukainen said there was agreement that the  framework should guide capacity-building activities related to  UNFCCC implementation in developing countries. He noted the cross- cutting nature of the outstanding issues relating to financial  issues, which had been conveyed to the group working on the  financial mechanism, and to the implementation of adaptation  measures and national programmes of action, being considered in  the contact group on adverse effects. In the draft decision, the  subsidiary bodies recommend that the COP, inter alia:urge the operating entity of the financial mechanism to adopt  a streamlined and expedited approach in financing activities  within the framework on capacity building in developing countries; encourage bilateral and multilateral agencies, and other  intergovernmental organizations to consult with developing  countries in formulating programmes and action plans to support  capacity-building activities in accordance with the framework; and decide to conduct a comprehensive review of the  implementation of this framework at COP-9 and every five years  thereafter.

The draft framework presents the purpose, guiding principles,  objective and scope and implementation guidelines, including  sections on financing and operation, time-frame, review of  progress and the role of the Secretariat. This draft decision and  annexed draft framework (FCCC/CP/2000/CRP.11) were then forwarded  to the COP for consideration..

### COP-6 High-level Informal Discussions:

During the informal high- level Plenary meetings held during the COP, this matter was  considered under 'Box A' issues, as identified by President Pronk,  which also included adverse effects and technology transfer.  'Informal informal' ministerial consultations co-facilitated by  Ministers Mabudhafasi and Auken made progress, except on the  outstanding financing issues.

### President's Note:

Since the ministers were unable to reach  agreement, President Pronk proposed in his Note to establish a  framework to guide capacity-building activities related to UNFCCC  and Protocol implementation, in order to assist non-Annex I  Parties, as elaborated in the two draft decisions. Subsequent  high-level negotiations failed to reach agreement and the issue  will now be taken up during the resumed COP-6 session.

### DEVELOPMENT AND TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGIES

During the first week of  negotiations, delegates met six times in contact group meetings as  well as in 'informal informal' consultations, to consider the Co- Chairs' revised text on a draft framework to enhance meaningful  and effective actions under UNFCCC Article 4.5 (development and  transfer of technology). The first week's negotiations focused on  themes in the framework relating to technology needs assessment,  technology information, and enabling environments, as well as  capacity building and mechanisms for technology transfer.  Following this, a revised text containing many brackets was  presented to COP-6 by the SBSTA on Monday, 20 November. During the  second week of negotiations, development and transfer of  technologies was considered in high-level informal discussions as  part of President Pronk's cluster of crunch issues contained in  his 'Box A.' However, high-level negotiations during the second  week failed to produce agreement, and text on this issue - still  containing brackets - will be considered again at the resumed  session of COP-6.

### SB-13 Part II:

At its first meeting on 13 November, SBSTA decided  to reconvene the contact group co-chaired by Jean Cooper (Canada)  and Oladapo Afolabi (Nigeria) established in Lyon. During the  first meeting of the contact group, the G-77/China questioned the  basis for the negotiations, recalling that they had submitted a  proposal for a draft decision in Lyon. The Co-Chairs explained  that the draft text under consideration was based on the Friends'  of the Chair consultations. Among the issues discussed in the  group was a proposal by Poland to include reference to EITs, which  Brazil said was not explicitly reflected in Article 4.5.

On 14 November, the Co-Chairs presented a revised text on the  framework with three additional appendices relating to: an  international clearinghouse; capacity-building activities on  technology transfer; and preliminary ideas for Terms of Reference  for an 'international panel of experts on technology transfer' or  the 'advisory group of experts on technology transfer.' Delegates  addressed issues relating to the funding of the assessment, and  whether the clearinghouse should be virtual and whether it should  be a permanent institution.

On the implementation of enabling environments, the G-77/China  said developing countries' actions depend on implementation of  Annex I commitments. Brazil, with China and Thailand, strongly  objected to a US proposal that made reference to the technology  transfer and the CDM, opposing attempts to link technology  transfer under the UNFCCC to the Protocol.

The US, Australia, Canada, Japan and New Zealand submitted a  proposal for a draft decision, which, inter alia, acknowledges the  potential of the CDM and JI to promote, facilitate and finance the  transfer of environmentally-sound technologies to enable Parties  to meet the provisions of the UNFCCC.

The contact group then split into two smaller drafting groups, one  addressing the first three themes in the draft framework -  technology needs assessment, technology information, and enabling  environments - and the second addressing capacity building and  mechanisms for technology transfer. After several informal  meetings of the drafting groups, delegates managed to agree on the  first three themes. However, divergence remained on sections on  capacity building and mechanisms. Delegates debated whether  language used in the framework should be mandatory, that is,  whether to use 'shall' or 'are encouraged to,' and over the need  for, and composition and functions of the proposed  intergovernmental panel of experts or advisory group of experts.  Despite numerous closed informal consultations, these issues  remained unresolved. The contact group therefore decided to  forward the text to SBSTA containing the unresolved framework  paragraphs and whole draft decision bracketed.

In the report back to SBSTA on 18 November, Co-Chair Afolabi said  more time was needed to consult and review all possible actions.  SBSTA adopted its draft conclusions containing the draft decision  and annexed draft framework and transmitted them to the COP for  further consideration. The bracketed draft decision  (FCCC/CP/2000/CRP.7) attempts to compile the proposals submitted  by Parties (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/MISC.9 and MISC.12) and the Co-Chairs'  proposal, as well as views expressed during the deliberations of  the contact group. It contains different options to paragraphs in  the decision, including those on the role of the public and  private sectors, the financing of technology transfer, and  institutional arrangements regarding the establishment of an  intergovernmental technical advisory panel or ad hoc scientific  and technical experts group.

### COP-6 High-level Informal Discussions:

This issue was considered  during the informal high-level Plenary meetings under President  Pronk's 'Box A' cluster of issues, together with capacity  building, adverse effects and the financial issues. 'Informal  informal' consultations co-facilitated by Ministers Mabudhafasi  and Auken were held from 21-23 November. During these  consultations, delegates failed to agree on: the financial issues;  the name and composition of the intergovernmental consultative  group of experts; the reporting and review activities and needs  under UNFCCC Article 4.5; and the development of an information  clearinghouse and technology centers network.

### President's Note:

In his Note, President Pronk proposed the  establishment of an intergovernmental consultative group of  technical and scientific experts under SBSTA on the basis of equal  geographical distribution. This group would advise SBSTA on  further actions, focus on means of addressing the identified  barriers for technology transfer and facilitate information  exchange and review by creating a clearinghouse and regional  technology centers. SBSTA would review the group's work on a  regular basis and, if necessary, request the COP to take any  further actions. No agreement was reached at the close of the COP,  and this issue will be taken up during the resumed session of COP- 6 (FCCC/CP/2000/CRP.7).

### ADVERSE EFFECTS

Implementation of Article 4.8 and 4.9 of the  UNFCCC and matters relating to Protocol Article 3.14 were  considered by delegates in relation to both the review of  implementation of UNFCCC commitments and preparations for COP/MOP- 1. Delegates also considered a draft decision on input to the  Third UN Conference on LDCs. During the first week of the meeting,  a contact group convened several times, and an informal Friends of  the Chair group also met, focusing on issues such as the operative  paragraphs on implementation of Article 4.9 (LDCs), and whether to  have one decision on UNFCCC Article 4.8/4.9 and Protocol Article  3.14, or two decisions. Text containing the draft decision(s) was  transmitted by the joint subsidiary bodies to the COP for its  consideration. During the second week of negotiations, adverse  effects was considered in high-level informal discussions as part  of President Pronk's cluster of crunch issues contained in 'Box  A.' However, negotiators failed to agree on these issues, and text  will be considered again at the resumed session of COP-6.

### SB-13 Part II:

On Monday, 13 November, the joint SBI/SBSTA  delegates considered reports of recent intersessional  consultations and agreed to reconvene the contact group on this  issue co-chaired by Bo Kjellén (Sweden) and Mohamad Reza Salamat  (Iran) to continue consideration on the text of the draft  decision(s).

On Tuesday, 14 November, Co-Chair Salamat introduced to the  contact group a draft proposal on the special considerations for  LDCs, which he said could possibly replace the third section of  the entirely bracketed draft decision(s) on adverse effects being  considered in this contact group. On whether to have one decision  on Article 4.8 and 4.9 and Article 3.14, or two separate  decisions, Co-Chair Salamat reported that legal advisers to the UN  had indicated that two separate decisions would be appropriate,  since the UNFCCC and Protocol are two distinct legal instruments,  but that the decision on this issue ultimately rests with the  Parties. On the section on adverse effects, the G-77/China opposed  text qualifying the assessment and evaluation of action related to  adaptation.

Delegates continued to discuss the text of the draft decision(s)  on Wednesday, 15 November. Brackets were retained around a sub- paragraph on 'demonstration adaptation projects,' and on immediate  implementation of certain adaptation activities. On a sub- paragraph on disaster preparedness and management, delegates  discussed whether disaster prevention was possible. Discussion on  the proposed disaster fund was postponed pending outcomes of the  financial issues group. A Friends of the Chair group met several  times in a closed session to continue discussing the text.  Delegates accepted the proposal by the LDCs to integrate the text  on their special treatment into the adverse effects section of the  draft decision(s). Discussion on the proposed adaptation fund and  the fund supporting specific concerns of LDCs was referred to a  financial issues group proposed by President Pronk, despite the  reservations expressed by the G-77/China, who held that the  financial issues relating to the decision(s) under Article 4.8 and  4.9 and Article 3.14 should not be discussed separately from  action outlined by the decision(s).

On Saturday, 18 November, the contact group met for the last time.  Co-Chair Kjellén introduced a revised Co-Chairs' text for the  draft decision(s), as well as the text of the operative paragraphs  on Article 4.9 implementation and a document including proposed  workshops relating to Article 4.8 and 4.9, Article 3.14 and LDCs.  Delegates then debated whether information on which to base  actions should derive from both national communications and other  relevant information, or from just one of these two sources.  Kjellén noted agreement on the inclusion of the operative  paragraphs on implementation of Article 4.9 in the draft  decision(s), but said the placement of this section would be  announced by the G-77/China.

During the joint subsidiary bodies meeting later in the day, Co- Chair Salamat presented the draft decision(s)  (FCCC/SB/2000/CRP.18). Highlighting the sense of cooperation in  the discussions, he stated that the text was not fully agreed.  SBI/SBSTA decided to transmit the draft decision(s) to the COP,  for its consideration.

### COP-6 High-level Informal Discussions:

On Monday, 20 November,  President Pronk announced, in an informal high-level Plenary, that  adverse effects was one of the 'crunch issues' for which agreement  had not been reached on all elements. He identified the  outstanding issues to be:all aspects relating to funding; the question of whether to adopt one decision (covering  Article 4.8 and 4.9 and Article 3.14) or two decisions (one for  Article 4.8 and 4.9 and another for Article 3.14); which actions should be taken to address the impacts of  response measures, and whether to include compensation; whether to use mandatory language in the context of actions  to be taken by Parties, including financing; and linkages between Article 3.14 and negotiations on accounting,  reporting and review.

On Tuesday, 21 November, during the informal high-level Plenary,  Parties responded to President Pronk's List of Issues under the  Buenos Aires Plan of Action, where he had clustered adverse  effects with capacity building, technology transfer, and guidance  to the GEF in 'Box A.' Summarizing the discussion, President Pronk  said further unanswered questions on adverse effects related to  how to give substance to the request for compensation on Article  3.14 and how to organize special facilities for LDCs. The  discussions were referred to informal consultations, co- facilitated by Ministers Auken and Mabudhafasi.

On Wednesday, 22 November, Minister Mabudhafasi reported on  progress made on Tuesday and noted that participants had  recognized the need to move toward concrete action. However,  during the second informal high-level Plenary of the day, Minister  Auken said that much remained unresolved, and informal contact  groups had been formed to deal with specific issues.

On Thursday, 23 November, Minister Auken reported that there was  deadlock on key 'crunch' issues, and that assistance from contact  group Co-Chairs Salamat and Kjellén had been requested.

### President's Note:

On Thursday evening, COP-6 President Pronk  presented a Note outlining proposals for a compromise agreement on  the key unresolved issues. On adverse effects, the Note outlined  actions to be taken by Annex II Parties, including: initiating  pilot/demonstration adaptation projects; undertaking adaptation  projects where sufficient information is available in specified  areas; and strengthening and establishing national and regional  centers, as well as information networks for rapid response to  extreme weather events.

The Note also proposed actions to address the impacts of response  measures under Article 3.14. It suggested that Annex I and other  Parties may report on their efforts to limit such impacts of their  implemented or future policies and measures in their national  communications, which would be reviewed under Protocol Article 8,  allowing flexibility for EITs. The note further put forward  actions by Annex II Parties to address impacts of response  measures on non-Annex I Parties under Article 4.8, through  concrete actions based on, inter alia, further methodological work  in economic diversification, increasing energy efficiency in  fossil fuel production, and advanced fossil fuel technologies.  These non-Annex I Parties should also report their specific needs  and concerns in their national communications.

On the needs of LDCs, including SIDS, the note suggested: a  separate work programme to be financed by the GEF, which would  focus on vulnerability and adaptation needs assessment, including  technology transfer and capacity building; development of national  adaptation programmes of action; implementation of concrete  adaptation projects; and the establishment of an LDC group of  experts. Also, in order to encourage a greater flow of CDM  projects to the LDCs, the note proposed that CDM projects in LDCs  be exempt from the share of proceeds for adaptation, and that the  implementation of 'small scale CDM projects' be promoted.

### Conclusion of COP-6 Part I:

On Saturday, 25 November, the COP  noted that no agreement had been reached and deferred  consideration of this issue to its resumed session  (FCCC/CP/2000/CRP.5). The COP then took note of a list of proposed  workshops relating to Article 4.8 and 4.9, Article 3.14 and LDCs  and adopted a document containing the Input to the Third United  Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries  (FCCC/CP/2000/CRP.13).

### ACTIVITIES IMPLEMENTED JOINTLY (AIJ)

At the joint SBI/SBSTA  meeting on Monday, 13 November, SBSTA Chair Dovland said Parties  had agreed, at a previous session, to defer consideration of the  draft revised uniform reporting format to SB-14. However, he asked  Kok Kee Chow (Malaysia), Chair of the contact group on the  mechanisms, to consult on a possible draft COP-6 decision  depending on the outcome of the negotiations on the mechanisms. On  AIJ, the joint SBI/SBSTA meeting on Saturday, 18 November, agreed  to forward to the COP proposed draft conclusions containing a  draft decision based on Chair Chow's informal consultations.

The COP-6 Plenary on Saturday, 25 November, took note of the draft  decision on AIJ under the pilot phase (FCCC/SB/2000/CRP.23), and  will take up this issue again at its resumed session. The draft  decision takes note of the fourth synthesis report on AIJ and of  the draft revised uniform reporting format. Under the decision,  Parties decide to continue the pilot phase for AIJ, and request  the Secretariat to organize a workshop on the revised reporting  format prior to SB-14. The draft decision further encourages  Parties to submit information using the revised reporting format  for the fourth annual synthesis report by 15 June 2001.

## PROPOSAL TO AMEND UNFCCC ANNEXES I AND II

During the formal Plenary meeting on Monday, 20 November, Turkey,  an observer State, called for its removal from the group of Annex  II Parties and requested to be considered an Annex I Party with  special circumstances. On Friday, 24 November, President Pronk  reported on relevant consultations held and invited Parties to  consider the amendment proposal at the next session of the SBI,  for definitive action at COP-7. The US, Pakistan and Kazakhstan  supported the proposal made by Turkey and this issue was deferred  to SB-14.

## PREPARATIONS FOR COP/MOP-1

### PROTOCOL ARTICLES 5, 7 AND 8

Delegates considered guidelines  under Protocol Articles 5 (methodological issues), 7  (communication of information) and 8 (review of information) in  SBSTA meetings and a contact group co-chaired by Helen Plume (New  Zealand) and Newton Paciornik (Brazil) that met during the first  week. Having made some progress on technical issues, text was  forwarded by the SBSTA to the COP on 18 November. This issue was  then taken up in informal high-level Plenary meetings and informal  consultations during the second week of negotiations. Since  agreement on this issue was not achieved, text will be considered  again at the resumed session of COP-6.

SBSTA-13 Part II: On Monday, 13 November, SBSTA heard a report  from contact group Co-Chair Plume on progress made at SB-13 Part  I, as well as during the intersessional informal consultations.  She said a revised paper had been prepared on that basis and that  a number of issues remained unresolved.

On Tuesday, 14 November, Co-Chair Plume presented the contact  group with a list of important issues requiring resolution:first order compliance; criteria for non-compliance; [initial] assigned amounts; timing for reporting and review; annual or periodic reporting and review of Article 3.14  (adverse effects); demonstrable progress; reporting on Article 4 (joint fulfillment); reporting on Articles 10 (existing commitments) and 11  (financial mechanism); [issuance and cancellation of assigned amounts related to  Article 3.3 (afforestation, reforestation, deforestation) and 3.4  (additional activities)].

Delegates added to this list: expert review teams (ERTs);  confidentiality; reporting on domestic and legislative  arrangements; questions of implementation; and supplementary  information under Article 7.

On first order problems, the US explained that annual reports  include information on both inventories and the assigned amount  and, opposed by the G-77/China, suggested that first-order  problems only refer to the former. On '[initial] assigned  amounts,' the US and Japan stressed that the terminology was  dependent on the outcome of the mechanisms group, while Brazil,  supported by the G-77/China, said the terminology related to  Protocol Article 3.1 (assigned amounts). On the timing for  reporting and review, discussions focused on the deadline for the  submission of information under Article 7 and highlighted the  linkages with the mechanisms group. The US, Japan, New Zealand and  the EU supported 1 January 2007 as this deadline, while Samoa  preferred the year 2005, so as to allow a pre-first commitment  period review and determination of eligibility to participate in  the mechanisms. On demonstrable progress, the EU, opposed by the  US, expressed support for an obligation for each Party to  demonstrate, in its national communication, progress in meeting  its commitments by 2005.

On Wednesday, 15 November, the contact group continued  consideration of the identified important issues. On reporting  under Articles 10 and 11, the G-77/China, opposed by the US and  EU, said Annex I Parties should also be requested to report on the  implementation of their commitments related to the transfer of  technologies and the provision of 'new and additional' financial  resources. Regarding '[issuance and cancellation of assigned  amounts (AAs) related to Protocol Article 3.3 and 3.4]' the G-77/China, supported by the EU and US, suggested referring to  'additions' and 'subtractions' from AAs in the guidelines under  Article 7. Opposed by New Zealand and supported by India, he added  that, pending agreement of this issue in the LULUCF group, any  reference to Article 3.4 should be bracketed.

In the guidelines under Article 8, the G-77/China suggested  deleting Part III on the review of information on AAs. India  explained that AAs are fixed amounts and therefore cannot be  reviewed, however, the information on additions and subtractions  would be reviewed. Brazil, on behalf of the G-77/China, then  introduced a text for a new Part III bis that addresses the  terminology 'initial AA' and replaces it with 'amounts that  contribute to the compliance of a Party included in Annex I with  the quantified emission limitation and reduction commitment under  Article 3.' On expert review teams (ERTs), the G-77/China recommended drawing  on a roster of experts reflecting regional balance. On  confidentiality, the EU introduced new text that provides, inter  alia, that the ERTs shall guarantee the confidentiality of  information that a Party indicates is confidential, and that if a  Party does not provide sufficient information for the assessment  of its conformity with the revised IPCC guidelines, the ERT shall  assume the estimate was not prepared accordingly.

On reporting of supplementary information under Article 7, the EU,  supported by Samoa and opposed by the US, Australia, Japan and New  Zealand, proposed text for a section on 'domestic programmes,'  which requires reporting on domestic policies and measures as well  as on the domestic system for monitoring legal entities'  participation in international emissions trading.

On 'questions of implementation,' the US, G-77/China, Brazil and  India opposed Japan's proposal to limit this concept to the  mandatory requirements of the guidelines under Articles 5.1  (national systems) and 7.2 (supplementary information). Concluding  this meeting, Co-Chair Paciornik said the Co-Chairs would prepare  a working paper.

On Thursday, 16 November Co-Chair Plume presented the working  paper to the contact group and explained the changes introduced.  Delegates then highlighted a number of issues with which they had  some concerns. On elements related to good practice guidance and  adjustments under Article 5.2 (adjustments), the G-77/China  suggested bracketing text on estimates of emissions and removals  from LULUCF since the discussions in the group on LULUCF had not  been concluded.  New Zealand, with the EU, US and Japan,  emphasized that such estimates from all sectors should be prepared  under good practice guidance, and be adjusted when they are not  prepared according to the agreed methodologies. In elements for a  draft COP/MOP-1 decision on this matter, the EU, Switzerland and  Norway disagreed over a US proposal, supported by Saudi Arabia,  New Zealand and Australia, to include text on ensuring that  adjustment procedures are conservative so that Parties would not  be unduly penalized.  The Co-Chairs requested interested Parties  to meet to further discuss the unresolved paragraphs.

On Friday, 17 November, the contact group continued consideration  of the Co-Chairs' working paper. On the draft COP/MOP-1 decision  related to Article 5.2, the US suggested that adjustments applying  to a Party's base-year inventory estimates could not be replaced  by revised estimates subsequent to the establishment of a Party's  initial AA. The G-77/China, opposed by the EU, said inventory  estimates of a year during the commitment period that had been  adjusted should not be revised and that consequently, adjustments  of estimates of both the base year inventory and the inventory  during the commitment period could not be revised.

On a proposal by the G-77/China to delete Part III on the review  of information on AA, the US said the guidelines should provide  for review of information related to AA. Delegates convened  throughout the afternoon and late into the night in a meeting of  the Friends of the Co-Chairs, to continue consideration of the Co- Chairs' working paper.

On Saturday, 18 November, Co-Chair Plume summarized the progress  made in the Friends of the Co-Chairs group and said that further  work on the guidelines would be undertaken, in one form or the  other, during the following week.

During the SBSTA meeting on Saturday, 18 November, contact group  Co-Chair Paciornik introduced draft conclusions recommending  adoption by COP/MOP-1 of guidelines under Article 5.1  (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/CRP.16), as well as draft SBSTA conclusions on  guidelines under Articles 5, 7 and 8 (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/CRP.17). He  said that although these guidelines still contained bracketed  text, progress was being made toward ensuring the Protocol's  credibility. SBSTA adopted both draft conclusions.

COP-6 High-level Informal Discussions: In the informal, high-level  Plenary session on Tuesday, 21 November, President Pronk said he  had clustered this issue in the fourth box, 'Box D,' together with  compliance and policies and measures. The G-77/China said three  elements were missing from President Pronk's summary of key  issues: reporting and review on Articles 10, 11 and on the issue  of supplementarity; equitable geographical representation of ERTs;  and reporting and review of Article 3.2 (demonstrable progress)  and 3.14 (adverse effects). Delegates then met in informal small  groups co-facilitated by Minister Siri Bjerke (Norway) and  Minister Suresh Prabhu (India) on Wednesday to further consider  this issue.

On Wednesday, 22 November, Minister Bjerke reported on the work  carried out in the informal small groups. She said text on  reporting under Articles 10 and 11 had been elaborated, and the  only bracket remaining in the decision on Article 8 related to the  composition of the ERTs. She said further brackets remained on  issues that were dependent on the outcome of other groups.

President's Note: The informal Note elaborated by President Pronk  and presented on Thursday, 23 November, did not address the  outstanding issues related to Articles 5, 7 and 8, suggesting that  these could be resolved when other issues have been dealt with.

During the following days, this item was considered by delegates  in closed informal negotiations, who reached agreement on some of  the remaining technical issues. Outstanding questions in the  guidelines under Articles 5, 7 and 8 include issues specific to  the guidelines, such as the allowed level of inventory adjustment  not constituting a first-order problem and the composition of the  ERTs, as well as cross-cutting issues awaiting resolution in other  groups, such as supplementary information relevant to Article 3,  in particular 3.3 and 3.14, information on Emissions Reduction  Units, Certified Emission Reductions and Assigned Amount Units,  and reporting on Article 4.

Conclusion of COP-6 Part I: On Saturday, 25 November, delegates  convened in a COP Plenary and took note of a Note by the President  on National Systems, Adjustments and Guidelines under Articles 5,  7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol based on the text forwarded by SBSTA  on Saturday, 18 November, as well as informal consultations  (FCCC/CP/2000/CRP.10) and the draft decision on Guidelines under  Article 5.1 (FCCC/CP/2000/L.2). Both items will be considered at  the resumed COP-6 session.

### LAND USE, LAND-USE CHANGE AND FORESTRY (LULUCF)

Text for  decisions on LULUCF were considered during SBSTA-13 Part II in a  contact group co-chaired by Halldor Thorgeirsson (Iceland) and  Philip Gwage (Uganda) that convened five times during the first  week, as well as in an informal Friends of the Chair group that  met on 17 and 18 November. These meetings focused on definitions,  accounting rules, Protocol Article 3.4, and sinks in the CDM,  without Parties reaching agreement. During the second week, LULUCF  was considered during the informal high-level Plenary, and  comprised one of the four issue-clusters ('Box C') subject to  intense informal consultations on Wednesday and Thursday, 22-23  November. The outcome of these consultations was incorporated by  President Pronk into his Note on 23 November, and was used as a  basis for further negotiations.

SB-13 Part II: On Tuesday, 14 November, contact group Co-Chairs  Thorgeirsson and Gwage introduced a Co-Chairs' text on LULUCF,  developed on the basis of Parties' inputs during SBSTA-13 Part I  and informal consultations. The US, Canada and Japan presented a  proposal for the phase-in of forest management under Article 3.4  (additional activities), stressing that it provided incentives to  implement additional sequestration activities. Under this  approach, a certain amount of carbon would be credited, after  which a discount would be applied. After a second threshold, full  crediting would again be permitted.

Participants discussed this proposal as well as elements of the  new Co-Chairs' text on Tuesday and Wednesday. The US, Canada and  Japan supported a decision on Article 3.3 (afforestation,  reforestation, deforestation) and 3.4 as a package, arguing that  this is critical to the success of the Protocol. Tuvalu, on behalf  of AOSIS, and the EU, China, Norway, Peru and Malaysia opposed  additional activities during the first commitment period. Brazil,  on behalf of the G-77/China, stressed the key role of emissions  reductions in Annex I countries.

Colombia and Bolivia cautioned against a 'pick-and-choose'  approach under Article 3.4, under which Annex I Parties could  account for additional activities that sequester carbon but ignore  additional sources. The EU stressed the need for consistency and  symmetry within all definitions. He underscored that definitions  under Article 3.3 and 3.4 would not necessarily be applicable  under Articles 6 (JI) and 12 (CDM), should sinks be allowed. On  the definition of 'forest,' AOSIS supported the biome approach.  The EU, the Environmental Integrity Group, Norway and Chile  agreed, but said the approach is not yet mature.

On Thursday, 16 November, the contact group met to provide  technical advice on inclusion of sinks under the mechanisms,  although the actual decision would be taken by the mechanisms  group.

Colombia presented its proposal on Expiring Certified Emissions  Reductions (CERs). Noting that permanence is the main problem  related to LULUCF activities, he suggested that all LULUCF  projects be treated as potentially non-permanent, and that  associated CERs should expire after a specific time period, after  which they would be replaced.

AOSIS stressed problems with sinks in the CDM due to scale,  reversibility, leakage, uncertainty, and negative environmental  and social impacts. Opposing sinks in the CDM, the EU argued that  inclusion would reduce the transfer of emissions reduction  technology to developing countries.

Bolivia supported conservation of existing forests under the CDM.  Costa Rica argued that North-South leakage would be a significant  problem should LULUCF activities not be allowed. The G-77/China  drew attention to the Group's principle that sinks provide  temporary removal only.

Australia and Canada said methodologies exist to deal with  problems related to sinks. The US pointed out that projects differ  in terms of how prone they are to leakage, and, with Canada and  Japan, stressed that the scale of actual LULUCF projects  implemented would be limited.

On Friday, 17 November, Switzerland, on behalf of the  Environmental Integrity Group, introduced a proposal to limit  credits for carbon sequestration due to windfall effects caused  by, inter alia, carbon dioxide fertilization, nitrogen deposition,  and age structure effects of forests. He said the proposal  involves the subtraction of a biome-specific threshold value for  windfall effects as well as a threshold value to account for other  uncertainties from sink credits.

Co-Chair Thorgeirsson then distributed a new Co-Chairs' text on  LULUCF, which was not accepted by the contact group because  preambular principles had been omitted. Work proceeded in the form  of closed Friends of the Chairs' consultations. However, when the  contact group reconvened on Saturday, 18 November, Co-Chair  Thorgeirsson explained that after meeting for 11 hours through the  night, the group had not reached consensus on enough issues to  warrant drawing-up new text. At the SBSTA plenary, he introduced  the draft decision to be forwarded to the COP  (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/CRP.11), noting principles suggested by Parties  included as unedited preambular material. Summarizing the session  on sinks under the mechanisms as well as submissions by Parties,  he said no consensus had been reached.

COP-6 High-level Informal Discussions: During the first informal  high-level Plenary on Monday, 20 November, the US added numbers to  a proposal, on behalf of the US, Japan and Canada, to phase-in  credits for activities under Article 3.4: all countries would be  able to count fully not more than 20 million tonnes of annual  carbon uptake in managed forests. Credits beyond this level would  be discounted by two-thirds.

In the discussion in the informal high-level Plenary on Tuesday,  21 November, the UK, on behalf of the EU, responded to the US  proposal. He said the EU accepts the concept of carbon sinks,  especially forests, but, with the Central Group Eleven (a group of  eleven central and eastern European countries) and Norway,  stressed a number of problems, especially of scale. The G-77/China  stressed the need to exclude credits for natural uptake. The US,  with Japan, said natural effects cannot be factored out in a  satisfactory manner.

An informal group, facilitated by Minister Julia Carabias Lillo  (Mexico) and Minister Lázló Miklós (Slovakia) and assisted by the  Co-Chairs of the LULUCF contact group, was convened. On Wednesday,  22 November, Minister Carabias Lillo reported on two sessions of  informal consultations on LULUCF, which had explored different  conditions for including Article 3.4 activities possibly even in  the first commitment period, under controlled conditions. She  noted that the issue had not yet been resolved. She said the  second meeting had focused on the inclusion of LULUCF activities  under the CDM. On Thursday, 23 November, she reported that the  informal group on LULUCF had split into two subgroups the previous  night, with one group focusing on the analysis of Article 3.4, and  the other on the inclusion of LULUCF activities under the CDM. On  the work of the former, she said ideas had been discussed for  discounting some elements, such as pre-1990 carbon uptake. On the  latter, she reported a common view within the group on the need to  address permanence, and said discussions had focused on the  possibility for further SBSTA consideration, with IPCC input, on  this matter. She said that approaches to a first pilot phase of  limited LULUCF projects had been considered. She then said the  LULUCF group had now reached a limit, and there was little  prospect for convergence.

President's Note: President Pronk, in his 23 November Note,  suggested that Parties would apply the FAO definition of 'forest'  under Article 3.3, taking national circumstances into  consideration, and apply the IPCC definition for afforestation,  reforestation and deforestation. The biome-specific approach to  the forest-definition would be further investigated.

In terms of additional activities under Article 3.4 in the first  commitment period, Parties would be allowed to include grazing and  cropland management, forest management, and revegetation. In order  to address the problem of scale, an upper limit of credits  amounting to 3% of a Party's base year emissions would be set.  Furthermore, Parties would receive full credits for Article 3.4  activities up to a level canceling out a possible Article 3.3  debit, as long as the total forest stock is growing. Above this  level, 85% of the credit would be reduced from forest management  activities, and 30% from other Article 3.4 activities, in order to  discount for non-direct human induced effects and uncertainty.  This 'factoring out' process would be reviewed periodically, and  receive IPCC guidance. On LULUCF under the CDM, afforestation and  reforestation would be allowed, while conservation projects would  not. These would be prioritized under the Adaptation Fund.

Conclusion of COP-6 Part I: Negotiations on President Pronk's Note  left unresolved all outstanding issues, including the key question  of whether to include Article 3.4 activities during the first  commitment period. During the closing Plenary of COP-6 Part I on  Saturday, 25 November, delegates adopted a decision  (FCCC/CP/2000/L.3) to continue work guided by the President's Note  and based on negotiating texts forwarded to the COP by SBSTA-13,  including the text on LULUCF (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/CRP.11).

### MECHANISMS

During the first week, delegates discussed issues  related to the Protocol mechanisms in three contact group meetings  chaired by Kok Kee Chow (Malaysia), and in numerous closed  'informal informals.' Negotiators focused on issues of  supplementarity, fungibility, the inclusion of sinks and/or  nuclear energy projects within the CDM, listing projects eligible  under the CDM ('positive lists'), and a levy on  the mechanisms.  During the second week, the issue of mechanisms was addressed in  high-level informal consultations, and closed informal sessions,  as part of the 'Box B' cluster of 'crunch issues.' Key concerns on  mechanisms were also addressed in the final set of closed  negotiations in response to Pronk's Note. However, Parties failed  to agree on these issues, in particular on the question of  supplementarity.

SB-13 Part II: In the opening joint meeting of SB-13 Part II on  Monday, 13 November, Chair Chow briefly presented the Chair's  texts on Protocol Articles 6 (JI), 12 (CDM), 17 (emissions  trading) and Registries (FCCC/SB/2000/10/Add.1, Add.2, Add.3 and  Add.4), which had been revised since SB-13 Part I. The first  contact group meeting on mechanisms was held on Monday afternoon,  where Parties reiterated their positions on key issues. Following  a short contact group meeting on Tuesday, 14 November, a closed  'informal informal' meeting was convened. 'Informal informals'  were held late into the night on Tuesday, and throughout the day  and late evening on Wednesday, 15 November. On Thursday, 16  November, the contact group on mechanisms met in an open session  to receive feedback from Chair Chow, and a revised text was  circulated on aspects of the modalities and procedures for the  CDM. The closed discussions continued on Thursday afternoon and  evening, and again throughout the day and late into the night on  Friday, 17 November. In the course of these meetings, a number of  subgroups were established, as a result of which brackets were  removed from largely non-contentious portions of the text.

On Saturday, 18 November, Chair Chow reported that progress had  been made, particularly regarding the decision sections of the  text. In the joint subsidiary bodies meeting on Saturday  afternoon, Chair Chow presented the draft conclusions on  mechanisms pursuant to Articles 6, 12 and 17, and on registries  (FCCC/SB/2000/CRP.19, CRP.20 and Add.1, CRP.21, and CRP.22).

COP-6 High-level Informal Discussions: In the SBSTA meeting on  Monday, 20 November, Chair Dovland reported agreement on a 'prompt  start' for the CDM, the features of its institutional  architecture, and the need for regional balance.

In an informal high-level Plenary on Tuesday, 21 November,  ministers and senior officials presented their views on a number  of outstanding 'crunch issues.' On the composition of the  Executive Board, the G-77/China emphasized the need for fair  geographical representation. The US said it could be flexible on  this issue. Regarding project eligibility under the CDM, the EU,  supported by Hungary, and opposed by Japan, Australia, the US,  Canada and Saudi Arabia, underlined its preference for a positive  list. The G-77/China argued that the host developing country  should be the sole judge in deciding on projects. The Africa Group  expressed concern with the proposal that submission of the  national communication be a precondition for CDM participation.  The US expressed flexibility on the potential for small projects,  on condition that there is no positive list and that sinks are  included. The US, Canada, Japan, Costa Rica, Australia, Colombia,  Honduras and Bolivia, opposed by the EU, China and Ghana, argued  in favor of including sinks in the CDM. The Russian Federation  suggested deferring a decision on sinks to the next commitment  period. Honduras, Saudi Arabia and Hungary argued against  inclusion of nuclear power in the CDM. Australia said it was for  individual developing countries to decide.

On the issue of supplementarity, Japan and the US urged against  renegotiating the Protocol. While recognizing the need for  flexibility, the EU drew attention to the importance of domestic  action. Indonesia argued in favor of requiring 70% of emissions  reductions through domestic action, with the possibility of this  being reduced under certain conditions. Hungary and the Africa  Group, opposed by the Russian Federation and Australia, advocated  implementation of a quantitative limitation on the flexibility  mechanisms.

The G-77/China, the Africa Group and Samoa, opposed by the US,  Canada, Japan, Russian Federation, Hungary and Australia, urged  the establishment of an adaptation fund based on a levy applied to  all three mechanisms. Japan, opposed by China and Indonesia,  supported using ODA funding for the CDM. On emissions trading and  liability, the G-77/China expressed preference for blending the  'commitment period reserve' and 'surplus units' options.

At the close of the informal high level Plenary on Tuesday, 21  November, an informal group was established, facilitated by  Minister Yuriko Kawaguchi (Japan) and Minister Ronaldo Mota  Sardenberg (Brazil), with the assistance of Kok Kee Chow. On  Wednesday, 22 November, Minister Kawaguchi reported on the  remaining divergent positions on the issues of supplementarity.  She said the EU had expressed interest in a possible qualitative  ceiling, and reported that India and the US were conducting  consultations on fungibility, AAs and the composition of the  Executive Board. On the CDM, she said the majority opposed an  indicative list of projects.

Closed informal discussions continued on Wednesday afternoon, 22  November, and a further progress report was presented to the  informal high-level Plenary that evening. The Ministers noted that  while there had been some progress on eligibility and financial  additionality, there had been insufficient progress on liability,  supplementarity, and the composition of the Executive Board.  Regarding the eligibility of projects, Minister Sardenberg said  the majority of Parties opposed a list. He also noted some support  on the use of ODA financing in the CDM, if this is additional to  current ODA levels. He noted growing agreement on the role of  small projects that may benefit from a fast track, although  technical details needed to be resolved, and he said there were  diverse views on the eligibility of LULUCF projects.

An informal high-level Plenary was held on Thursday morning, 23  November, to receive reports on the previous evening's closed  discussions. Minister Kawaguchi said agreement was near on details  relating to the CDM, including: financial additionality; fast  track on small projects; use of share of proceeds from CDM for  adaptation; environmental additionality; and no list for project  eligibility. She noted progress on emissions trading, registries  and participation. On the cross-cutting issues, she reported  agreement on eligibility of Annex I Parties to use mechanisms, but  disagreement on share of proceeds, fungibility and  supplementarity.

President's Note: President Pronk's Note, issued on Thursday, 23  November, proposed that the Executive Board comprise equal numbers  from each UN regional group, plus one representative from the  SIDS. It stated that efforts shall be taken to reach agreement by  consensus, with a three-fourths majority vote as a last resort.  The Board shall be subject to the authority and guidance of, and  be accountable to, the COP/MOP. The note advocated a prompt start  for the CDM, with the Board to be elected at the next session of  the subsidiary bodies.

On CDM project eligibility, the note recognized the host Party's  discretion to evaluate a project's contribution to sustainable  development. It proposed that Annex I Parties declare their  intention to refrain from using nuclear facilities for generating  CERs, and that expedited consideration be given to energy  efficiency improvements and renewable energy. On supplementarity,  it proposed that Annex I Parties meet their emissions reduction  commitments primarily through domestic action, and that compliance  be assessed by the facilitative branch of the compliance committee  on the basis of qualitative and quantified information.

On trading modalities and liability, the note proposed that Annex  I Parties retain a portion of their AAs in their national  registries, specific to that commitment period, and that this  portion shall be 70% of their AAs, or the portion determined on  the basis of projected or recent emissions. This shall be  recalculated and, if necessary, adjusted after the annual review  of each Party's emissions data.

On fungibility, the note proposed, inter alia, that emission  reduction units and parts of assigned amounts may be exchanged  according to rules and procedures to be established by the  COP/MOP. The note advocated fostering equitable distribution of  CDM projects. Provision is made for fostering LDC participation in  the CDM. On JI, the note proposed that no stringent procedures are  needed on verification if Parties meet reporting requirements, but  that Parties failing to meet these requirements should follow CDM  procedures.

Conclusion of COP-6 Part I: Despite the subsequent closed informal  sessions to discuss the texts, Parties failed to reach a  compromise. As a result of the discussions throughout the second  week, a revised set of draft decisions on Articles 6 (JI), 12  (CDM), 17 (emissions trading) and Registries (FCCC/CP/2000/CRP.1,  CRP.2, CRP.2/Add.1, CRP.3 and CRP.4) was developed for further  consideration at the resumed session of COP-6.

### COMPLIANCE

During SB-13 Part II, compliance under the Protocol  was considered by joint SBSTA/SBI meetings on Monday, 13, and  Saturday, 18 November, and several times by the Joint Working  Group on Compliance (JWG) from Tuesday, 14, to Friday, 17  November. Delegates focused on differentiation between Annex I and  non-Annex I Parties, inclusion of principles, the role of the  COP/MOP, consequences, and adoption. During the second week of  COP-6, the issue was further considered by the COP Plenary on  Monday, 20, and Saturday, 24 November, and by the informal high  level Plenary on 20-23 November, as well as in informal  consultations co-facilitated by Minister Siri Bjerke (Norway) and  Minister Suresh Prabhu (India) as part of President Pronk's fourth  cluster of 'crunch issues' - 'Box D.' Having failed to agree  during final negotiations on 24 and 25 November, the JWG  conclusions were forwarded to the resumed session of COP-6.

SB-13 Part II: During the first session of the joint SBI/SBSTA on  Monday, 13 November, Amb. Neroni Slade (Samoa), Co-Chair of the  JWG, reported on informal consultations and said a revised text  had been prepared that would serve as a basis for the  negotiations.

At the first session of the JWG on Tuesday, 14 November, Co-Chair  Slade introduced the revised text. On the inclusion of principles  within the text, the G-77/China, opposed by the US and Japan,  urged their retention. On the plenary of the Compliance Committee,  the G-77/China, opposed by the US, EU, Australia, the Russian  Federation and New Zealand, said it should have an allocation as  well as a preliminary examination function. On the mandate of the  facilitation branch, the EU, with the US, Australia and New   Zealand, and opposed by Saudi Arabia, China and the United Arab  Emirates, said cases should be dealt with on their merits and not  on the basis of the Party involved. On the mandate of the  enforcement branch, the G-77/China said the branch should only  deal with Annex I Parties. Saudi Arabia and the United Arab  Emirates, opposed by Samoa and Japan, said Article 3.14 (adverse  effects) was enforceable.

On Wednesday, 15 November, following informal consultations by Co- Chair Slade, delegates reconvened in an evening session of the JWG  and commented on the Co-Chairs' draft proposals presenting three  options for the adoption of procedures and mechanisms on  compliance: adoption by a decision; adoption as an amendment to  the Protocol; and adoption as an agreement integrated into the  Protocol. The G-77/China said it was premature to decide on one  option. Japan, Australia and the Russian Federation, opposed by  the US, the EU and Canada, supported adoption by a decision.

On Thursday, 16 November, delegates met in the JWG, as well as in  closed 'informal informal' consultations and drafting groups to  continue work on negotiating text. During the formal session of  the JWG, the G-77/China presented its views, contained in a new  submission, on consequences under a compliance regime. On  facilitative consequences, the G-77/China reiterated that these  should be differentiated between Annex I and non-Annex I Parties.  On enforcement consequences, she said these should only apply to  Annex I Parties and, depending on the provision not complied with,  include: suspension of Party's eligibility to participate in the  mechanisms; submission of a compliance plan; declaration of non- compliance; suspension of rights and privileges; a contribution to  the Compliance Fund; and deduction from its assigned amount in the  subsequent commitment period against a penalty rate.

On Friday, 17 November, delegates met in an 'informal informal'  meeting to consider a revised Co-Chairs' text based on Wednesday's  discussions and ensure that their proposals were adequately  reflected. Delegates then convened in a formal session where they  considered the report of the JWG. Co-Chair Dovland concluded the  final meeting of the JWG by underlining that although delegates  had hoped to have a clear text as the JWG's end product, this had  been challenging due to the large number of difficult issues that  had to be addressed.

On Saturday, 18 November, Co-Chair Slade presented to the joint  SBI/SBSTA the report of the JWG on its work during SB-13 Part II  (FCCC/SB/2000/CRP.15/Rev.1). He said two submissions from Parties  on the sections on Principles and the Relationship with Article 16  (Multilateral Consultative Process) had been inadvertently  omitted. The report, as amended by Co-Chair Slade, was forwarded  to the COP.

COP-6 High-level Informal Discussions: On Monday 20, November, SBI  Chair Ashe reported on the outcome of the work of the SBI during  its 12th and 13th sessions, including the JWG draft conclusions  (FCCC/SB/CRP.15/Rev.2). Delegates then met in an informal high- level Plenary where President Pronk suggested that the outstanding  issues include: consequences, differentiation, composition,  COP/MOP, legal form for adoption and mandate of the branches.

On Tuesday, 21 November, President Pronk proposed that compliance  with the Protocol be clustered in 'Box D' together with Articles  5, 7 and 8, and policies and measures.

On Wednesday, 22 November, delegates convened in an informal high- level Plenary session to advance negotiations on the outstanding  issues. Poland, for the Central Group Eleven, said the treatment  of non-compliance should not be based on the Parties, but on the  nature of the commitment. With the Russian Federation, she called  for flexibility for countries with EIT. China highlighted that a  strict compliance system should be based on Articles 5, 7 and 8.  He added that the different responsibilities of Annex I and non- Annex I Parties should be reflected in the sections on principles,  mandate and consequences. He concluded by raising the issue of the  bodies' composition and called for adherence to the principles of  fairness and equitable geographical representation. Pronk said the  question of composition was a cross-cutting issue. Argentina  expressed concern over the adoption of a compliance regime and a  possible amendment of the Protocol before its entry into force. On  consequences, he said good faith should constitute the main source  of confidence in this agreement. The US said legally-binding  consequences need not be punitive and highlighted that she  supported a deduction from the following commitment period with a  1.3% penalty rate as well as a restriction on the transfer of  units also applicable to Protocol Article 4 (joint fulfillment)  Parties. The EU argued that Article 4 is not a mechanism, and,  commenting on Argentina's intervention, said good faith is not  sufficient due to inclusion of market-based mechanisms in the  Protocol. He explained that legally-binding consequences were thus  justified both by concerns over the environmental integrity of the  Protocol, as well as by the necessity to provide the private  sector with the confidence needed for the use of the mechanisms.  The G-77/China stressed that non-compliance affects everyone, not  only the trading partners of Annex I Parties, and urged that this  must be reflected in the composition of the compliance committee.

Australia and the Russian Federation argued for a non-binding  regime and said their countries were more concerned about their  own compliance than that of others. Supporting Australia, Japan  explained that its main trading partners were not the other Annex  I Parties but non-Annex I Asian countries. AOSIS said payment in a  voluntary fund would actually provide Parties with an additional  flexible mechanism.

Delegates also met in closed informal consultations on these  issues in the afternoon, although the meeting was cut short when  protestors entered the room and disrupted negotiations. The  consultations reconvened in the early evening and were followed by  an informal high-level Plenary where co-facilitator Minister  Bjerke reported that discussions had focused on consequences and  highlighted the need for more time, given the interruption of the  work.

On Thursday, 23 November, Minister Bjerke reported that the  previous night's discussions had focused on the establishment and  structure of the Compliance Committee, the functions of the  plenary, as well as on how principles could be reflected in the  compliance text. She noted that more time was needed, since not  all the 'crunch' issues had been resolved.

President's Note: Thursday night's President's Note suggested that  consequences for non-compliance with Article 3.1 (assigned amounts  - AAs), be agreed in advance and consist of: subtraction of excess  emissions from the AA of the subsequent commitment period against  a penalty rate of 1.5 to 1.75%; and submission of a compliance  action plan. On differentiation between Annex I and non-Annex I  Parties, it proposed that: the mandate of the enforcement branch  be limited to commitments incumbent on Annex I Parties; there are  no eligibility requirements for non-Annex I Parties under the CDM;  and facilitative consequences are not differentiated between these  two groups of Parties. On the role of the COP/MOP, the note  proposed limiting it to general policy guidance, and suggests  having no appeals procedure. On the mandate, it proposed that the  enforcement branch cover quantitative commitments and eligibility  under Protocol Articles 6, 12 and 17, and that all other cases  fall within the mandate of the facilitative branch.

On the composition of the Compliance Committee, both the  facilitative and the enforcement branch would have 11 members  nominated on the basis of current UNFCCC practice. Under the  enforcement branch, decisions would be adopted by a double  majority as a whole, and in Annex I and non-Annex I, if there was  no consensus. Finally, the note suggested that the compliance  system be adopted, with legally binding consequences, as an  agreement supplementing the Protocol prior to its entry into  force.

During the following days, this issue was discussed in closed  informal meetings, both among delegates and high-level officials,  without an agreement being reached on the issues identified in  President Pronk's Note, in particular, the enforcement  consequences.

Conclusion of COP-6 Part I: During the Plenary meeting on  Saturday, 25 November, COP-6 took note of the JWG draft  conclusions (FCCC/SB/CRP.15/Rev.2) that contain one draft  decision, the procedures and mechanisms relating to compliance  under the Protocol, and final clauses.

POLICIES AND MEASURES (P&Ms): During the first week of  negotiations, delegates discussed text on P&Ms in five contact  group meetings co-chaired by José Roméro (Switzerland) and Richard  Muyungi (Tanzania), as well as in a number of closed 'informal  informals.' Following the first week's negotiations, which  centered on text developed during SB-13 Part I, a revised set of  draft conclusions containing much bracketed text was presented by  SBSTA-13 to the COP on Monday, 20 November. In the second week of  negotiations, the issue of P&Ms was addressed in high-level  informal discussions as part of President Pronk's fourth cluster  of 'crunch issues' - 'Box D.' As a result of these discussions  clean text of a draft decision on P&Ms was developed for adoption  at the resumed session of COP-6.

SB-13 Part II: In the opening SBSTA meeting on Monday, 13  November, Chair Dovland noted that SBSTA had agreed to continue  consideration of the elements on a draft decision on 'best  practices' in P&M that had been developed in earlier SBSTA  meetings During the contact group negotiations during the first week,  Parties proposed amendments to the negotiating text. Among the  issues raised were whether to: delete the section of the preamble  recalling specific provisions of the UNFCCC and Protocol; include  reference to enhancing the effectiveness of P&Ms in terms of  Protocol Article 2 (P&Ms) in its entirety or limit it to Article  2.1(b) (Cooperation on P&Ms); include reference to specific  international organizations, including in particular OPEC, to  support future work on P&Ms; and whether to request the  Secretariat to compile information on P&Ms implemented and planned  by Annex I Parties based on information in national  communications. They also discussed the use of criteria and  quantitative parameters to assess the effectiveness of P&Ms and  the call by the G-77/China and Saudi Arabia for an assessment of  the actions of Annex I Parties in striving to implement P&Ms in  such a way as to minimize adverse effects. The EU and G-77/China  underscored that future work on P&Ms should contribute to an  assessment of demonstrable progress of Annex I Parties in  achieving their Protocol commitments.

The assessment of 'demonstrable progress' was one of the most  contentious issues. Canada, with the support of Japan, Australia  and the US, and opposed by the G-77/China and the EU, proposed  replacing the existing decision and its associated initiatives  with alternative text stating that consideration of demonstrable  progress cannot take place until the SBSTA has considered the  issue pursuant to the guidelines that may be elaborated under  Article 7, given that Articles 2 and 3.2 provide no mandate for  P&Ms to be considered in the context of demonstrable progress.  Following 'informal informal' discussions at the end of the first  week, the Co-Chairs proposed three broad options on this issue for  consideration by the COP. In the closing meeting of SBSTA-13 Part  II, Co-Chair Roméro presented the revised draft conclusions on  'best practices' in P&Ms among Parties included in Annex I to the  Convention (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/CRP.14). These were forwarded for  consideration by the COP.

COP-6 High-level Informal Discussions: During the informal high- level consultations held during the second week, the issue of P&Ms  was considered within the fourth cluster of 'crunch' issues  identified by President Pronk, 'Box D,' which also included  consideration of compliance and Articles 5, 7 and 8. In an  informal high-level Plenary on Tuesday, 21 November, ministers and  senior officials presented their views on the following  outstanding 'crunch' issues on P&Ms: the assessment of  'demonstrable progress' under Protocol Article 3.2 by 2005;  approaches to dealing with the adverse impacts of P&Ms on  developing countries; and the possibility of defining common  criteria to assess the effectiveness of P&Ms.

The EU underlined the value of non-Annex I Parties participating  in workshops on P&Ms, argued that emissions inventories alone are  not comprehensive enough to assess demonstrable progress in 2005,  and suggested a COP-7 decision on the information needed in this  regard. The G-77/China said the whole of Protocol Article 2 should  be referred to in the decision, and suggested keeping specific  reference to 'Annex I Parties.' At the close of the informal high- level plenary on Tuesday, an informal group was established to  consider the 'Box D' cluster of issues, facilitated by Ministers  Bjerke and Prabhu.

In the report back to the high-level Plenary on Wednesday evening,  22 November, Minister Bjerke reported that discussions on  demonstrable progress had focused on what to report and when. She  noted that a sub-group had identified a possible compromise, based  on the earlier proposal by Canada. On Thursday morning, 23  November, she reported that the group had converged around the  idea that reporting should take place in 2005 as a report separate  from national communications.

President's Note: President Pronk's Note, distributed in the  evening of Thursday, 23 November, proposed that Parties continue  information exchange on P&Ms, and that the COP invite the  submission of views by Annex I Parties on the meaning of  demonstrable progress and the need for guidelines for reporting on  this progress, with a view to having further consideration at COP- 7.

Conclusion of COP-6 Part I: By the conclusion of the meeting,  negotiators managed to develop clean compromise text on a draft  decision on  'good practices' in P&Ms among Annex I Parties  (FCCC/CP/2000/CRP.6). This draft decision, inter alia:decides that future work on P&Ms should contribute to the  improvement of transparency, effectiveness and comparability of  P&Ms, by: enhancing transparency in reporting on P&Ms in the  national communications of Annex I Parties through, as  appropriate, criteria and quantitative parameters; facilitating  information sharing on ways to minimize adverse effects of P&Ms;  and assisting Parties in identifying further options for  cooperation between Annex I Parties to enhance the individual and  combined effectiveness of their P&Ms; and decides that future work should contribute to the elaboration  of elements for reporting information on demonstrable progress.

This draft decision will be considered further at the resumed  session of COP-6.

### IMPACT OF SINGLE PROJECTS ON EMISSIONS IN THE COMMITMENT PERIOD

During the first joint SBI/SBSTA session on Monday, 13 November,  SBSTA Chair Dovland reminded delegates of the draft decision  proposed by Iceland at COP-4 and said further consultations would  be conducted by Ole Plougmann (Denmark) during the week. On  Saturday, 18 November, Plougmann reported to the SBI/SBSTA that  consultations on this issue had resulted in an 'almost agreed'  draft decision (FCCC/SBSTA/2000/CRP.13). On Saturday, 25 November,  the COP took note of the draft decision and will consider it  further at its resumed session in order to clear remaining  brackets.The draft decision defines a single project and sets the  guidelines for reporting carbon dioxide emissions from a single  project that has come into operation since 1990.

## ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL MATTERS

SBI considered the report on administrative and financial matters  on Monday, 13 November. On late payment of contributions, Chair  Ashe noted that informal consultations had been held, but further  consideration would be postponed until SB-14, given the workload  during COP-6. On Saturday, 18 November, the SBI considered and  took note of a status report on receipt of contributions from  Parties as at 31 October 2000 (FCCC/SBI/2000/INF.11).

SBI also considered the Headquarters Agreement. Chair Ashe  recalled that issues had been raised regarding office space and  visa difficulties relating to the Secretariat in Bonn. Germany  said it had agreed on 14 November to offer joint accommodation for  the secretariats of the UNFCCC and Convention to Combat  Desertification in the former parliamentarians' office building.  He noted ongoing efforts on other outstanding issues. SBI adopted  draft conclusions noting these statements.

On Saturday, 25 November, COP-6 adopted a draft decision relating  to administrative and financial matters forwarded by SB-13  (FCCC/CP/2000/Add.1, Annex II). This decision, inter alia:takes note of the audited financial statements for the  biennium 1998-99; takes note of the initial report on financial performance in  2000, including the status of contributions to all the trust funds  of the Convention; expresses appreciation to Parties that have paid their  contributions; urges Parties that have not paid their contributions to the  core budget to do so without delay; takes note of the UNFCCC Executive Secretary's continued  consultations with the UN to achieve a more rational and efficient  approach to the UNFCCC's administrative arrangements; and notes with satisfaction the initiative to establish common  administrative and support services with the UN Convention to  Combat Desertification.

## OTHER MATTERS

On Saturday, 25 November, COP-6 adopted a resolution forwarded for  its consideration by SB-12, whereby it expresses solidarity with  Mozambique and other countries in Southern Africa following the  devastation caused by Cyclone Eline (FCCC/SBI/2000/5, Annex II).

## HIGH-LEVEL SEGMENT - FORMAL STATEMENTS

From 20-24 November, delegates to COP-6 heard statements in  Plenary from high-level representatives of more than 100 Parties,  including three elected Heads of Government, four Vice Presidents,  two Deputy Prime Ministers, and 63 Ministers. In addition,  presentations were made by representatives of Observer States,  intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental organizations,  and youth networks.

### Statements by elected Heads of Government:

On Monday, 20 November,  delegates in the COP-6 Plenary heard statements by Wim Kok, Prime  Minister of the Netherlands, and Jacques Chirac, President of  France. Prime Minister Wim Kok said the Netherlands would commit  200 million Dutch Guilders for adaptation measures and capacity  building, which would be additional to previously agreed  contributions. He concluded that a 'worldwide package deal' was  needed that provided for new patterns of production and  consumption in industrialized countries, created an international  market for greenhouse gas emissions permits, and gave preferential  treatment to LDCs.

French President Jacques Chirac stated that since 1992, Parties  had fallen too far behind in taking actions to combat climate  change. Suggesting that 'everyone is waiting for someone else to  make the first move' in negotiations, he highlighted that the US  produces a quarter of the world's emissions, and that the per  capita US levels of emissions are three times higher than those of  France. He said each country has a duty to build structures that  cut its own emissions to a minimum and emphasized that flexible  mechanisms should not be seen as a means to escape domestic  measures.

On Friday, 24 November, Costa Rican President Miguel Angel  Rodriguez Echeverria addressed the Plenary, encouraging delegates  to adopt decisions leading to effective and efficient action, and  underscoring market mechanisms as providing positive incentives  for change. He highlighted the initiative for a prompt start to  the CDM, and supported the inclusion of forestry, including the  reduction of deforestation.

### Statements by other Parties:

On Tuesday, 22 November and  Wednesday, 23 November, over 100 senior government representatives  outlined their policies and positions on the climate change  negotiations and issues related to the UNFCCC and Kyoto Protocol.  Many speakers highlighted the importance of maintaining the  environmental integrity of the Protocol, and urged ratification  and entry into force by 2002. Many statements also underscored the  principle of common but differentiated responsibilities under the  Protocol.

Many developing countries underlined the need for Annex I Parties  to fulfill their obligations in protecting the climate system on  the basis of equity and in accordance with the principle of common  but differentiated responsibilities. On commitments, the US stated  that success of the Protocol requires the involvement of all  countries, while Kuwait opposed the imposition of any additional  obligations on developing countries.

On the mechanisms, a number of countries reiterated the need for  the mechanisms to be supplemental to domestic action. On the CDM,  many countries supported a 'prompt' start, and a number of  developing countries highlighted the need for equitable  distribution of projects.

On sinks in the CDM, Costa Rica, Bolivia, Senegal and Guatemala  supported their inclusion, while Ireland, Austria, Greece and  Tuvalu expressed their opposition to such a proposal. New Zealand,  Norway, Austria, Honduras, Costa Rica, Greece and Tuvalu opposed  including nuclear energy in the CDM. Japan said that developing  countries' judgment of what constitutes sustainable development  should not be overruled by limiting the types of eligible  activities under the CDM.

Bhutan emphasized the need for active participation by LDCs,  suggesting their exemption from an adaptation surcharge. South  Africa and Tanzania said the adaptation levy on the CDM should  also apply to the other mechanisms.

On compliance, many countries indicated their support for a strong  system. Japan said disagreements over the compliance regime should  not delay the Protocol's entry into force. South Africa reiterated  the G-77/ China's support for mandatory consequences. On LULUCF,  Japan said it was essential not to lose the incentives for  appropriate sink activities. Norway said that contribution from  sinks should be limited in the first commitment period. Malaysia  and Thailand opposed inclusion of additional activities under  Protocol Article 3.4 in the first commitment period.

On capacity building, technology transfer and adverse effects,  many speakers stressed that these issues had to be recognized and  addressed, with special attention given to LDCs and those most  vulnerable to climate change. Speakers also highlighted the role  of the private sector in technology transfer.

Saudi Arabia expressed concern over the impacts response measures  will have, and supported a compensation fund to assist countries  whose economies would be affected by the implementation of  response measures.

Bhutan, Nepal and Peru drew attention to the significant effects  of climate change on fragile mountain ecosystems. The need for  additional resources to support developing countries to cope with  climate change was highlighted by many speakers. Noting the need  to reform the GEF, Canada called for the creation of a 'window'  within the GEF to deal with special climate change issues such as  adaptation. The UK recognized the value of an adaptation fund and  technology transfer, and expressed a preference for an improved  and enhanced GEF with a 50% increase in contributions.

### STATEMENTS BY OBSERVER STATES, INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS,  NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS AND UN BODIES

During a COP-6  Plenary session held on Monday afternoon, 21 November, delegates  heard statements from 12 UN bodies, specialized agencies and  related organizations, four intergovernmental organizations, 13  non-governmental organizations and one observer State. Several  statements highlighted the need for decisions to ensure the  environmental integrity of the Protocol and address financing for  capacity building, adaptation and technology transfer.

Noting the growing body of scientific evidence on the  anthropogenic effect of climate change, the World Meteorological  Organization urged the COP to support climate research to resolve  uncertainties, address the needs of the most vulnerable countries  and ensure support to the IPCC to complete its Third Assessment  Report. The IPCC said impacts such as the spread of diseases,  rising sea levels, and bleaching of coral reefs will undermine  sustainable development.

UNEP urged developed countries to make a prompt start in reducing  their emissions under the principle of common but differentiated  responsibilities. Several speakers highlighted the synergies  between the UNFCCC and other multilateral environmental  organizations. The World Bank emphasized the link between  environmental protection and poverty alleviation. A number of  speakers highlighted the CDM, its contribution to sustainable  development, the need for its prompt start, and translation of  environmental objectives into business opportunities. The  International Atomic Energy Agency urged Parties to consider  nuclear energy in the context of climate change, stating that the  concerns about safety and possible proliferation of weapons are  not based on climate concerns. Climate Network Africa emphasized  the importance of a concrete adaptation fund.

TURKEY, an observer State, called for its removal from the group  of UNFCCC Annex II Parties and requested to be considered an Annex  I Party with special circumstances.

### STATEMENTS BY YOUTH REPRESENTATIVES

On Tuesday, 21 November,  youth representatives from Kenya and the UK reported to COP-6 on  the International Youth Conference held the previous week, which  was attended by 118 young people from 61 countries, and urged all  delegates to read and address the Youth Declaration. On Friday, 24  November, COP-6 participants heard a statement by the youth  delegate from Tanzania, who provided the perspective of the youth  present at the conference. She said the group had formed a  network, the World Youth Organization on Climate Change. The youth  delegate from Brazil presented a copy the programme defining this  initiative to President Pronk.

## CLOSING PLENARY

### INFORMAL HIGH-LEVEL PLENARY

At 2:00 pm on Saturday afternoon, 25  November, delegates met for the closing informal high-level  Plenary. President Pronk highlighted the three stages of  negotiations - among delegates, among Ministers with the  assistance of co-facilitators, and finally on the basis of his  Note -explaining that in each format, negotiators had proceeded as  far as they could. He said Ministers had negotiated during the  last 36-48 hours and had not reached an agreement. He expressed  his disappointment and said the expectations of the 'outside  world' had not been met. He said it was not adequate to only say  that there was no agreement, and that some perspective had to be  offered.

SBI Chair Ashe, on behalf of the COP-6 Bureau, proposed that COP-6  be suspended and resume during the time slots already allocated  for SB-14 in May-June 2001. Several speakers supported this  proposal. Argentina said the expectations for this meeting had  been excessive and underlined that the process toward the  objective of the UNFCCC does not end with each one of its  individual stages.

The G-77/China hoped that the texts forwarded by SB-13 to the COP  would guide discussions in the resumed session. He attributed the  failure to the lack of political will from the North. The EU said  although the meeting would be considered as a failure, Parties had  worked much more seriously than in any previous COP. She  highlighted the tremendous difficulties of the issues and said she  had not wanted a weak agreement, but one without loopholes. She  concluded that she was committed to continue work on sinks,  compliance and mechanisms and promised to bring forward common EU  and other groups' proposals on these issues. The US stressed its  commitment to ensuring progress in the years ahead, and said no  other country had shown as much creativity in trying to break the  'log-jam.' Switzerland thanked President Pronk for the transparency during  the negotiations. Saudi Arabia expressed his faith that success  would be achieved, and said it was necessary to base discussions  in the next meeting on the Buenos Aires Plan of Action.

### FORMAL PLENARY

Following the informal high-level Plenary,  President Pronk opened the formal closing Plenary of COP-6 Part I  at 4:30 pm. The COP took note of documents relating to  organizational matters, review of implementation of commitments  and of other provisions of the UNFCCC, preparations for COP/MOP-1,  and other matters. President Pronk then introduced a draft  decision on the implementation of the Buenos Aires Plan of Action  (FCCC/CP/2000/L.3).

After minor amendments to the text, COP-6 adopted this decision,  whereby the COP:notes progress in considering all issues under the Buenos  Aires Plan of Action; takes note of the formal note by the President dated 23  November 2000, as an element of political guidance to the  completion of work on the negotiating texts forwarded to the  Conference by its subsidiary bodies on 18 November 2000, and those  contained in the notes by the President dated 24 and 25 November  2000, and invites Parties to submit views on those texts by 15  January 2001, to the Secretariat; decides to suspend COP-6 and requests its President to seek  advice on the desirability of resuming that session in May/June  2001 with the aim of completing work on negotiating texts and  adopting a comprehensive and balanced package of decisions on all  issues under the Buenos Aires Plan of Action; requests President Pronk to make proposals for the further  development and consideration of texts and seek advice before the  resumed meeting takes place, doing so in a transparent manner; and urges Parties to intensify political consultations among  themselves and seek common ground to enable the successful  conclusion of negotiations under all issues under the Plan of  Action.

COP-6 then adopted a resolution proposed by Nigeria, on behalf of  the G-77/China, expressing the COP's gratitude to the Netherlands  and the city of The Hague for hosting this meeting  (FCCC/CP/2000/L.4).

In closing, President Pronk stated that, although he had felt  disappointed and dispirited earlier in the day, discussions over  the previous few hours and the statements during the final  informal high-level Plenary had given him fresh hope that an  agreement could be reached. He thanked delegates and the UNFCCC  Secretariat for their hard work, and declared COP-6 suspended  shortly after 6:00 pm.

# A BRIEF ANALYSIS OF COP-6. COP-6: BUILDING CASTLES IN THE SAND OR AIR?

'All of our dreams, our mass-dream-spinners, Palaces, hovels, every lair - Seem, when the Flood then comes, to be Just castles in the sand or air'Quatrain by Dutch Poet Laureate Gerrit Komrij Presented to COP-6 by The Government of The NetherlandsMost negotiators who participated in The Hague conference left on  Saturday evening with a profound sense of disappointment. This was  'the deal that almost was,' the occasion where agreement appeared  so near on a number of highly-charged political issues. For most  observers of The Hague, the success of the conference was to be  measured by its contribution to promoting the entry into force of  the Kyoto Protocol by 2002, while at the same time protecting its  environmental integrity. To achieve this goal, delegates set out  with the aim of reaching agreements on over 200 pages of text on a  range of issues on which agreement at COP-6 had been expected, in  line with the Buenos Aires Plan of Action. At the end of the two  weeks, Parties had failed to reach consensus on a number of key  political issues, let alone made any significant progress in  advancing the text. There is good reason for profound  disappointment.

While observers will share the disappointment of delegates, it is  suggested that there is nevertheless room for cautious optimism.  As a result of the Ministerial consultations that took place  during the second week, the initial foundations for a possible  political agreement have been laid, and there is reason to believe  that there is a real willingness to address four key sticking  points that remain: sinks, supplementarity, compliance, and  funding. Furthermore, having already failed once to meet the  expectations of the outside world, Ministers will be under  significant pressure to ensure success in the second round.  The  consequences of failure a second time are significant. If no  progress is made at COP-6 Part II, there is a real danger that the  agreements reached in Kyoto will be as effective in controlling  the rising tide of climate change, as the NGO's symbolic dike  outside the conference center: little more than castles in the  sand.

This brief review of the events in the Hague seeks to identify  some of the principal reasons for the failure or, in the word of  the press officer, the 'non-success' of the conference. In so  doing it asks the following questions: What were the main  political stumbling blocks that caused deadlock in the  negotiations, and how effective was COP-6 President Jan Pronk in  seeking to resolve these issues?

## WHAT SUNK THE COP?

If there was one word that dominated discussions at the Hague it  was 'sinks' (known to climate change cognoscenti as 'LULUCF').  This issue characterizes the attempts of negotiators to strike the  right balance between promoting ratification of the Protocol,  while at the same time maintaining its environmental integrity.  While there is little doubt disagreement on sinks was a principal  stumbling block, this issue was not the only impediment to  progress. Strongly divergent political opinions were also evident  on each of the other 'technical' matters on which text had been  developed.

While it appears that credible compromises were made on many of  these issues, there are four key concerns which remain, and which  are likely to dominate future attempts to salvage COP-6: LULUCF,  the Protocol mechanisms, the nature of the compliance regime, and  financing.

### LULUCF

On the most visible issue - LULUCF - two 'crunch'  questions in particular stalled progress: the inclusion within the  first commitment period of additional activities under Protocol  Articles 3.4 (seen by many Umbrella Group Parties as a  precondition for ratifying the Protocol, and considered with great  caution by the EU and G-77/China); and the issue of sinks in the  CDM (on which there was fundamental division between the Umbrella  Group and the EU, as well as among members of the G-77/China).  There is much speculation that disagreement on these issues was  responsible for scuppering the last-minute deal that apparently  was almost brokered by the UK Deputy Prime Minister John Prescott,  between the US and the EU. It seems his compromise package, which  possibly sought to cater to Umbrella Group demands on sinks, was  not acceptable to others within the EU. While Pronk's Note made a  valiant attempt to find convergence on this issue, it seems the  stakes were too high.

### MECHANISMS

Another prominent source of disagreement relates to  the operating rules and procedures on the Protocol mechanisms,  with unresolved differences remaining particularly on  supplementarity, CDM project eligibility, and modalities and rules  for trading. The Umbrella Group as a whole continued to urge the  development of simple procedures that facilitate the widespread  use of mechanisms across a broad range of issues (including  nuclear and sinks), thereby enabling cost-effective attainment of  Protocol targets. In the view of many observers, such rules would  significantly compromise the environmental integrity of the  Protocol by allowing 'loopholes' against the domestic attainment  of the originally agreed targets. The EU insisted on imposing a  quantitative limit on the use of the mechanisms, and on adopting a  'positive list' of largely energy-related projects for the CDM.  The G-77/China sought to optimize benefits from the CDM, while  urging financial and environmental additionality, as well as  imposing a share of proceeds on all three mechanisms.

There were signs during the meeting that the EU was willing to  show flexibility on some of the issues. Most notably it appeared  to be relaxing its emphasis on a 'quantitative,' in favor of a  'qualitative' limit on the mechanisms. At the end of day, however,  it was apparent that the Pronk's proposed compromise - of meeting  emissions commitments 'primarily through domestic action' - was  not sufficient. While differences remain regarding the proposals  on CDM project eligibility and emissions trading, the key source  of disagreement appears to be supplementarity.

### FINANCE

Much of the media's coverage on the collapse of the  talks has focused on the apparent inability of the EU and US to  reach a compromise on sinks and supplementarity. However, to  imagine that agreement on these issues alone would have saved the  talks in the last hour is to make the arrogant - and mistaken -  assumption that this would have proved acceptable to the G-77/China. Not only does the Group have its own strong position on  these issues, but there were also a number of unresolved  differences on concerns of particular importance to the Group:  funding and adverse effects, technology transfer and adaptation  under the UNFCCC.

Throughout the Hague there was strong divergence on the role of  the GEF and other funding sources, as well as over the linkages  with Protocol-related activities. Pronk's proposal for additional  sources of funding, including the establishment of an Adaptation  Fund, a Convention Fund and a Climate Resources Committee, have  received a cautious reaction. The exact details of the operation  of the proposed Funds and the amount of funding that will be  available remain unclear. Although these proposals could be viewed  as being a positive step, the texts still link funding under the  UNFCCC to actions under the Protocol, an issue on which the G-77/China strongly objects.

### COMPLIANCE

On the issue of compliance, while the majority of  Parties had expressed support for a 'strong' compliance system,  the translation of this objective into legal and technical terms  revealed divergent positions on issues such as: differentiating  treatment of compliance for Annex I and non-Annex I Parties;  enforcement consequences; the method of adoption of a compliance  regime; and the composition of the compliance bodies. In the eyes  of a number of observers, Pronk's proposals on compliance provide  the most positive set of compromises. He seems to have struck a  fair balance between the Parties' main expectations on enforcement  consequences, differentiated treatment, and the composition of  bodies. While his Note does not provide any suggestions for the  method of adoption of the compliance regime, this is an issue on  which a satisfactory solution is possible once consensus is  reached on the content of text on compliance procedures and  mechanisms. Compliance thus seems to be one of the 'crunch' issues  that could be handled relatively smoothly at the resumed COP-6  session. However, achieving balance between deterrence and overly- stringent enforceable consequences will be a matter of fine  tuning.

## DRAWING A LINE IN THE SAND

In an attempt to secure political agreement on these key issues,  Pronk produced a President's Note, on Thursday, 23 November, in  which he proposed a 'balanced package' aimed at facilitating  ratification of the Protocol, without unduly affecting its  environmental integrity. He presented his Note, not as a 'take-it- or-leave-it' package, but as a basis for further discussion and  improvement. Not surprisingly - coming midway through the  negotiations - the Note produced strong reactions from Parties.

Some NGO observers expressed disappointment that the Note appeared  to make more concessions to the US position, which if accepted,  could compromise the Protocol's integrity. Others said the Note  was too vague, and even though it did take the variety of  interests into account, it had not narrowed the gaps between  Parties enough to constitute a basis for consensus. On the other  hand, a number of commentators considered it to be a well  constructed document that provided a realistic opportunity for  compromise. In the words of one delegate, it was a 'very good,  intelligent document.' While Pronk's Note may indeed have 'caused pain for all' - as he  promised it would - it has served the vital function of drawing a  line in the sand, and serving as the basis for future political  negotiations. Much work remains to be done, with a particular  focus required on resolving political disputes relating to sinks,  supplementarity, compliance and the nature of the international  financial mechanism.

## AT THE HELM IN THIS 'TITANIC ENDEAVOUR'

In what was perhaps an unfortunate mix of metaphors, a delegate  speaking during negotiations on the mechanisms expressed  confidence in Pronk's ability to successfully manage the 'Titanic  endeavor' of 'navigating delegates through a sea of brackets.' The  irony of his wording was not lost on delegates, many of whom were  already speculating that a credible agreement would be sunk by the  conflicting demands of strongly competing vested interests. Many  expressed the hope, however, that Pronk - no stranger to the  delicate art of international environmental negotiations - would  be able to manage this monumental task. While initial views on  Pronk's performance over the week were conflicting, Pronk's  ability at the end of the day to steer a course between Parties'  competing interests, and to bring key negotiators together,  appeared to have been appreciated by many of the high level  participants.

## CONCLUSION - 'THERE IS NO TIME TO LOSE'

For many observers, one of the lasting images from The Hague will  be that of the Head of the US delegation, Under Secretary of State  for Global Affairs Frank Loy, wiping cake from his face following  an assault by a young activist. Immediately following the  incident, Loy reminded the assembled press corps that it was the  anniversary of John F. Kennedy's assassination, and in an ironic  choice of wording, quoted Kennedy's call to Americans not to be  swayed by those 'confusing rhetoric with reality.' Following the failure at The Hague, one may be tempted to reflect  on another of Kennedy's speeches:'...we must think and act not only for the moment, but for our  time. I am reminded of the story of the great French Marshal  Lyautey, who once asked his gardener to plant a tree. The gardener  objected that the tree was slow-growing and would not reach  maturity for a hundred years. The Marshal replied, 'In that case,  there is no time to lose, plant it this afternoon.'' In the context of climate change, Kennedy's statement is of  particular relevance, not as an exhortation to plant trees - on  which such fundamental disagreement remains - but as a statement  to policy-makers to recognize the long time-scales associated with  climate change, while at the same time appreciating that this is  no excuse for delaying action.

As it transpired, the expectations of the Hague meeting were  unduly optimistic. The hope of achieving consensus on so many  politically contentious issues proved in the end to have been a  case of building castles in the air.

# THINGS TO LOOK FOR BEFORE COP-7

### VILLAGE POWER 2000

This event will be held from 4-7 December  2000, at the World Bank in Washington, D.C. Workshops will be held  on 4 December, and a conference will be held from 5-7 December.  For more information, contact: Barbara Ferris, National Renewable  Energy Laboratory, tel: +1-303-275-3781; fax: +1-303-275-4320; e- mail: barbara_ferris@nrel.gov; Internet:   http://www.villagepower2000.com/ CLIMATE CHANGE - SINK OR SWIM? This forum will be held at the  Institute of Physics, London, on 6 December 2000. For more  information, contact: James Allport, Institute of Physics; tel:  +44-20-7973-3070; e-mail: james.allport@britassoc.org.uk

### GLOBAL FORUM ON SUSTAINABLE ENERGY

This forum will be held at the  International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) in  Laxenburg, Austria, from 11-13 December 2000, and is intended as a  platform for multi-stakeholder dialogue on issues pertinent to  sustainable development. For further information and registration,  contact: Amb. Irene Freudenschuss-Reischl, tel: +43-1-263-729120;  fax: +43-1-263-7281; e-mail: Irene.freudenschuss-reicjl@bmaa.gv.at

### 12TH MEETING OF THE PARTIES TO THE MONTREAL PROTOCOL

MOP-12 is  scheduled to take place in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, from 11-15  December 2000. The 32nd Meeting of the Executive Committee of the  Multilateral Fund will be held prior to this, from 4-8 December,  also in Ouagadougou. For more information, contact: the Ozone  Secretariat; tel: +254-2-62-1234; fax: +254-2-62-3601; e-mail:  ozoneinfo@unep.org; Internet: http://www.unep.org/ozone/12mop.htm

### EIGHTH SESSION OF WORKING GROUP I OF THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL  ON CLIMATE CHANGE

This meeting will take place from 17-20 January  2001, in Shanghai, China. For more information, contact: N.  Sundararaman; Secretary to the IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland; tel:  +41-22-730-8208; fax: +41-22-730-8025; Internet:  http://www.ipcc.ch

### 12TH GLOBAL WARMING INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE & EXPO - KYOTO  COMPLIANCE REVIEW

This meeting will be held in Cambridge, UK,  from 8-11 April 2001. For more information, contact: Sinyan Shen,  Global Warming International Center Headquarters, Naperville,  Illinois, USA; tel: +1-630-910-1551; fax: +1-630-910-1561;  Internet: http://www2.msstate.edu/~krreddy/glowar/gw12c.html

### UNFCCC SB-14/RESUMED COP-6

The 14th sessions of the Subsidiary  Bodies of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change will take  place from 21 May - 1 June 2001, in Bonn, Germany. This meeting  may also serve as the resumed COP-6 (as outlined under COP-6  decision FCCC/CP/2000/L.3). For more information, contact: the  UNFCCC Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999;  e-mail: secretariat@unfccc.int; Internet: http://www.unfccc.int

### UNFCCC COP-7

This meeting is scheduled to take place from 29  October - 9 November 2001, in Marrakech, Morocco. For more  information, contact:  the UNFCCC Secretariat; tel:  +49-228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail:  secretariat@unfccc.int; Internet: http://www.unfccc.int